

  IV

  POLYGAMY AT THE POLITE DINNER-TABLE

  'Last and hardest of all to eradicate in our midst, comes the
  monopoly of the human heart which is known as marriage . . . this
  ugly and barbaric form of serfdom has come in our own time by some
  strange caprice to be regarded as of positively divine origin.'
    --GRANT ALLEN.


We call it the polite dinner-table, because we never hesitate to be
extremely rude to each other, when necessary for the purposes of
argument. On this particular occasion, the inevitable marriage
discussion, which is always to be found in one or other of the
newspapers, was the subject of conversation, and the Good Stockbroker
(unmarried) was vigorously defending the Holy Estate. His moral attitude
is certainly somewhat boring, but nevertheless the Good Stockbroker is
one of those people to whom one really is polite. Although obvious
irritation was visible on the face of the Family Egotist we listened
respectfully, with the exception of the Wicked Stockbroker, whose dinner
was far too important in his scheme of life to be trifled with by moral
conversations.

Whatever the Good Stockbroker says the Weary Roue is of course bound to
contradict as a matter of honour. I may mention that the Weary Roue is a
man of the highest virtue and a model husband and father. His pose of
evil experience has gained him his sarcastic nickname, but in no way has
he earned it by his conduct. 'You forget,' he interposed languidly, when
the Good Stockbroker paused, 'that no less a philosopher than
Schopenhauer said that the natural tendency of man is towards polygamy,
and of woman towards monogamy.'

'I deny the first statement,' said the Good Stockbroker heatedly. He was
always heated where questions of morality were concerned, and was
proceeding to give chapter and verse for what promised to become a
somewhat dull discussion when the Bluestocking firmly interposed in her
small staccato pipe:

'To hear you, one would suppose monogamic marriage was a divine
institution.'

'Absurd, isn't it?' grinned the Weary Roue. The Good Stockbroker looked
pained and cleared his throat. At this formidable signal, the Family
Egotist--whose irritation had been increasing like the alleged
circulation of a newspaper--showed every sign of hurling the boomerang
of his opinion into the fray. This would have meant the death of all
liveliness for some hours to come, and a general sigh had begun to
heave, when once more our brave Bluestocking stemmed the tide.

'You make rather a cult of the Bible,' she quacked scornfully, directing
her remarks principally at the Good Stockbroker; 'but you don't seem
very conversant with the Old Testament. You will find there ample proof
that monogamic marriage is no more divine than--than polygamy or free
love. Nor has it any celestial origin, since it varies with race and
climate. It is simply an indispensable social safeguard.'

'I'll have a shilling each way on it,' murmured the Ass (an incorrigible
youth, quite the Winston Churchill of our family cabinet), using his
customary formula. Unheeding, the Bluestocking chirruped on severely:
'You must know, if you have ever studied sociology, that marriage is
essentially a _social contract_, primarily based on selfishness. At
present it still retains its semi-barbarous form, and those who preach
without reason of its alleged sacredness would be better employed in
suggesting how the savage code now in vogue can be modified to meet the
necessities of modern civilisation.'

She paused for breath. The Good Stockbroker was pale, but faced her
manfully. 'Well done, Bluestocking!' said the Weary Roue. 'Wonderful
woman, our Quacker,' said the Ass, 'I'll have a shilling each way on
her.' The Wicked Stockbroker took a second helping of salad, and ate on
unheeding, whilst the Gentle Lady at the head of the table anxiously
watched the Family Egotist, who looked apoplectic and was toying
truculently with a wineglass with evident danger of shortening its
career of usefulness.

'I was taught,' said the Good Stockbroker slowly, 'to regard marriage as
a sacred institution--a holy mystery.'

'Then you were taught rot,' snapped the Bluestocking, thus living up to
the worst traditions of the polite dinner-table, and quivering with
intellectual fury.

'Recrimination--' began the Good Stockbroker.

('Good word that, I'll have a shilling each way on it,' murmured the
Ass.)

'--is not argument,' continued the Good Stockbroker.

'It may not be, but what you said was _rot_,' replied the Bluestocking,
'"a holy mystery, instituted in the time of man's innocency"--I
recognise the quotation! And when was that time, pray? Are you referring
to the Garden of Eden, or to what part of the Bible? The chosen people,
the Hebrews, were polygamists from the time of Lamech, evidently with
the approval of the Deity. Even the immaculate David had thirteen wives,
and the saintly Solomon a clear thousand. Not much of a holy mystery in
those days, eh?'

'Dear Bluestocking, you really _are_--' murmured the Gentle Lady.

'Not at all; she's perfectly sound,' interposed the Weary Roue, gloating
with ghoulish joy over the Good Stockbroker's apparent discomfort.

'I give in,' said the latter, and a yell of joy burst from the Ass and
the Weary Roue. 'I really cannot argue against a lady of such
overwhelming eloquence,' he continued, bowing in his delightful courtly
way. 'All the same, I shall always believe that marriage is a holy
institution.'

'My dear old chap,' said the Weary Roue, hastily, with one eye on the
Family Egotist, who was certainly being treated badly that evening:
'your high-mindedness is admirable, quite admirable, but it won't work;
it doesn't fit into modern conditions. Theoretically, Marriage is a Holy
Mystery no doubt--in practice it's apt to be an Unholy Muddle, sometimes
a Mess. Personally I believe in polygamy.'

Roars of laughter were stifled in their birth, as we thought of the
Weary Roue's circumspect spouse, and his several circumspect children,
discreet from birth upwards.

'So do I--a shilling each way,' said the Ass, inevitably.

'Not for myself, of course,' continued the Weary Roue, without a trace
of a smile, 'that is to say, not--er--not now, but speaking for the
majority and--er, in the abstract, polygamy would be a sensible
institution. Just think how it would simplify all our modern
complications, how it would mend our two worst social evils.'

'Yes, _think_, please--thinking will do,' interposed the Gentle Lady,
hastily.

'How it would solve the superfluous woman question,' continued the Weary
Roue, enthusiastically. 'Think of the enormous number of miserable
spinsters who would be happily provided for.' An indignant quack came
from the Bluestocking.

'Think of the expense,' remarked the Good Stockbroker, dryly, and the
Weary Roue collapsed like a pricked gas-bag.

'Herbert Spencer says,' continued the Good Stockbroker, 'that the
tendency to monogamy is innate, and all the other forms of marriage have
been temporary deviations, each bringing their own retributive evils.
After all, monogamous marriage was instituted for the protection of
women, and has been held sacred in the great and noble ages of the
world. Quite apart from the moral point of view, however, polygamy could
only be possible in a tropical climate, where the necessities of life
were reduced to a minimum, and one could live on dates and rice, but as
the average man in our glorious Free Trade country can't afford to keep
one wife, in decent comfort, let alone several--I ask, how in the name
of the bank rate--?'

'You stockbroking chaps are so devilish sordid,' returned the Weary
Roue. 'Didn't I say _in the abstract_? Of course I know it wouldn't do
practically, not yet anyway, but honestly I believe it would go far to
solve the whole sex problem.'

'You neither of you seem to take the woman into consideration at all,'
piped the Bluestocking. 'Do you suppose we modern women with our
resources and our education would consider such an idea for a moment?'

'Well, what do you think?' asked the Weary Roue, with diplomatic
deference.

To our surprise the Bluestocking began to blush, and her blush is not
the coy, irresponsible flushing of an ordinary girl, but a painful rush
of blood to the face under stress of deep earnestness, the kind of blush
which forces one to look away.

'Well,' she said, with a gulp, 'I think, perhaps--they might.' It was
obvious the admission had cost her something. We were all dumfounded.
The Family Egotist forgot his burning desire for speech and ceased to
threaten his wineglass; the Gentle Lady was quite excited; the Weary
Roue became almost alert, and the Good Stockbroker looked as if he were
about to burst into tears.

'I think women might not be averse from polygamy--as a choice of evils,'
continued the little Bluestocking bravely, 'for the present waste of
womanhood in this country is a very serious evil. Of course the
financial conditions make it impossible, as the Good Stockbroker says,
but if it _were_ possible, if it were instituted for highest motives,
and in an entirely honourable, open manner authorised and sanctioned by
the--er--the proper people--I think women could concur in it without any
loss of self-respect, especially if the first ardent love of youth were
over. After that, and when a woman forgets herself, having truly found
herself, in the love and care of her children and a larger view of life
and its duties--then I think most women could be happy in such
circumstances. I think a great deal of utterly untrue stuff is talked
about the agony of sexual jealousy, and women's jealousy especially.
Men may suffer thus, I can't say, but I'm sure women don't. It's the
humiliation, the unkindness, the _being deceived_ and supplanted that
hurts so when a man is unfaithful. But if it were all fair and
above-board, if it were grasped that polygamy is more suited to men's
nature, and more likely to make for the happiness of the greatest number
of women--their numerical strength being so far in advance of men that
they couldn't possibly expect to have a mate each--then I really think,
after women had had time to readjust their ideas to this new
condition--it may take a generation or more--I think they would accept
it gladly, and find peace and contentment in it.'

The Bluestocking paused and looked round the circle of interested faces.
Even the Ass was intent on her words, but the Good Stockbroker's eyes
were averted and the Bluestocking was quite pale as she continued:

'Of course the word at once recalls the harem, the zenana, but nothing
of that kind would do. The wives would have to live separately, as the
Mormons do, each in her own home, with her own circle of interests and
duties, her own lifework. No one ought to live in idleness, which is the
cause of all sorts of discord and trouble. Every woman should work at
something, and to help someone. I'm not thinking now, of course, of
happily married and contented women, but of the thousands leading
miserable, dull, and lonely lives, who would be infinitely happier if
they had a certain week to look forward to, at regular recurring
intervals, when their husbands would be living with them. It would bring
love and human interest and, what is most important of all, a _motive_
into their existence. I know it sounds dreadfully immoral,' she went on,
blushing again painfully, 'but, oh! I don't mean it like _that_. After
all, the chief reason why people marry is for companionship, and it is
companionship that unmarried women, past the gaiety of first youth,
chiefly lack. The natural companion of woman is man; therefore, as there
aren't enough husbands to go round, it follows that one might do worse
than share them. I don't say it would be as satisfactory as having a
devoted husband all to oneself, but it might be for the greatest good of
the greatest number, and it would surely solve to a certain extent
the--the social evils.'

They all clapped when she had finished somewhat breathlessly. It was
obvious that the brave Bluestocking so far lacked the courage of her
opinions as to be agonisingly embarrassed at this public expression of
them. The Gentle Lady, who is the most tactful creature in existence,
accordingly rose before anyone had time to speak, and the two women left
the room together.

A babble of talk arose from the men, under cover of which the Good
Stockbroker also slipped quietly away.

'Pass the port,' said the Wicked Stockbroker, briskly. 'She's a deuced
bright little woman, but how even the brainy ones can be so ignorant of
life beats me, and how you chaps can be such hypocrites. . . . !'

'Hypocrites! what d'you mean?' blustered the Family Egotist, who was by
now almost bursting with suppressed talk.

'Not you, old chap, but the Weary Roue and the Good Stockbroker, jawing
away as if they really thought monogamy was in the majority in this
country, and polygamy was something new! Of course one expects it from
the G. S., but you, W. R., really ought to know better--by the way,
where is the G. S?'

'I think he must have gone to propose to the Bluestocking--to save her
from polygamy and her own opinions,' drawled the Weary Roue, lighting
his cigarette.

'Stout fella! I believe he has!' cried the Ass, excitedly. 'I'll have a
shilling each way on it with any of you--I mean it, really!'

'Oh! what if he has?' said the Family Egotist, irritably. 'What does one
fool more in the world matter? Do stop rotting, you fellows, and pass
the port.'


