

  VII

  THE ADVANTAGES OF THE PRELIMINARY CANTER

  'Marriage is terrifying, but so is a cold and forlorn old age.'
    --R. L. STEVENSON.


Of all the revolutionary suggestions for improving the present marriage
system, the most sensible and feasible seems to me marriage 'on
approval'--in other words, a 'preliminary canter.' The procedure would
be somewhat as follows: a couple on deciding to marry would go through a
legal form of contract, agreeing to take each other as husband and wife
for a limited term of years--say three. This period would allow two
years for a fair trial, after the abnormal and exceptionally trying
first year was over. Any shorter time would be insufficient. At the
conclusion of the three years, the contracting parties would have the
option of dissolving the marriage--the dissolution not to become
absolute for another six months, so as to allow every opportunity of
testing the genuineness of the desire to part. If no dissolution were
desired, the marriage would then be ratified by a religious or final
legal ceremony, and become permanently binding.

In the case of a marriage dissolved, each party would be free to wed
again; but the second essay must be final and permanent from the start.
This restriction would be absolutely necessary if the preliminary canter
plan is not to degenerate into a species of legalised free love, as
there are many men, and some women, who would 'always go on cantering,'
as Amoret expressed it once--and the upshot would be nothing less than
leasehold marriage for the short term of three years.

It might be urged against this plan that many couples who come to grief
in the danger zone of married life--_i.e._ nearing the tenth year--are
perfectly happy in the early years. But human love being as mutable as
it is, and people and conditions being so liable to change, it is
impossible to arrive at any permanent marriage system which allows for
this. It must, however, be remembered that, in the majority of unhappy
unions, it is not the system, but the individuals who are to blame. The
institution of the conjugal novitiate would, however, reduce the number
of divorces considerably, by making less possible the miserable misfits
in temperament now so prevalent. It would give a second chance to those
who had made a mistake, yet without resulting in that promiscuity of
intercourse which is a danger to society and fatal to the best interests
of the race. Of what other scheme can the same be said?

For married women in the novitiate period a new prefix would have to be
invented, which they would retain if the union were dissolved. _Mrs_
would be the distinguishing prefix of women who had entered on the final
and permanent state of matrimony. Whether the wife would take the
husband's surname during the probationary term would be another question
for decision by the majority; I should incline to her retaining her
maiden name with the aforesaid prefix, and only assuming that of the
husband with the Mrs of finality. But these are mere details.

As regards the important question of the children, the issue of a
probationary union would, of course, be legitimate, but I think wise
people would see to it that no children were born to them until the
marriage had been finally ratified. Certainly children would be the
exception rather than the rule, but the question of their custody in the
case of dissolved marriages would be one requiring the most thoughtful
legislation. To divide the child's time between the parents is an
undesirable expedient, and one that must to a certain extent be harmful,
since a settled existence and routine is so essential for children's
well-being. Yet to deprive the father of them altogether is equally
undesirable.

The conjugal novitiate is not a new scheme. It was practised prior to
the Reformation in Scotland under the name of 'hand-fasting.' The
parties met at the annual fairs, and by the ceremony of joining hands
declared themselves man and wife for a year. On the anniversary of this
function they were legally married by a priest--if all had gone well
with them. If they had found the union a failure they parted.




  PART IV

  CHILDREN--THE _CUL-DE-SAC_ OF ALL REFORMS


  'An early result, partly of her sex, partly of her passive strain
  is the founding, through the instrumentality of the first savage
  Mother, of a new and beautiful social state--Domesticity. . . . One
  day there appears in this roofless room that which is to teach the
  teachers of the world--a Little Child.' --HENRY DRUMMOND.

  'Every good woman is by nature a mother, and finds best in
  maternity her social and moral salvation. She shall be saved in
  child-bearing.' --GRANT ALLEN.

  'Children are a man's power and his honour.' --HOBBES.


