

I.

The Psychological Significance of Detumescence--The Testis and the
Ovary--Sperm Cell and Germ Cell--Development of the Embryo--The External
Sexual Organs--Their Wide Range of Variation--Their Nervous Supply--The
Penis--Its Racial Variations--The Influence of Exercise--The Scrotum and
Testicles--The Mons Veneris--The Vulva--The Labia Majora and their
Varieties--The Pubic Hair and Its Characters--The Clitoris and Its
Functions--The Anus as an Erogenous Zone--The Nymphae and their
Function--The Vagina--The Hymen--Virginity--The Biological Significance of
the Hymen.


In analyzing the sexual impulse we have seen that the process whereby the
conjunction of the sexes is achieved falls naturally into two phases: the
first phase, of tumescence, during which force is generated in the
organism, and the second phase, of detumescence, in which that force is
discharged during conjugation.[72] Hitherto we have been occupied mainly
with the first phase, that of tumescence, and with its associated psychic
phenomena. It was inevitable that this should be so, for it is during the
slow process of tumescence that sexual selection is decided, the
crystallizations of love elaborated, and, to a large extent, the
individual erotic symbols determined. But we can by no means altogether
pass over the final phase of detumescence. Its consideration, it is true,
brings us directly into the field of anatomy and physiology; while
tumescence is largely under control of the will, when the moment of
detumescence arrives the reins slip from the control of the will; the more
fundamental and uncontrollable impulses of the organism gallop on
unchecked; the chariot of Phaethon dashes blindly down into a sea of
emotion.

Yet detumescence is the end and climax of the whole drama; it is an
anatomico-physiological process, certainly, but one that inevitably
touches psychology at every point.[73] It is, indeed, the very key to the
process of tumescence, and unless we understand and realize very precisely
what it is that happens during detumescence, our psychological analysis of
the sexual impulse must remain vague and inadequate.

From the point of view we now occupy, a man and a woman are no longer two
highly sensitive organisms vibrating, voluptuously it may indeed be, but
vaguely and indefinitely, to all kinds of influences and with fluctuating
impulses capable of being directed into any channel, even in the highest
degree divergent from the proper ends of procreation. They are now two
genital organisms who exist to propagate the race, and whatever else they
may be, they must be adequately constituted to effect the act by which the
future of the race is ensured. We have to consider what are the material
conditions which ensure the most satisfactory and complete fulfillment of
this act, and how those conditions may be correlated with other
circumstances in the organism. In thus approaching the subject we shall
find that we have not really abandoned the study of the psychic aspects of
sex.

The two most primary sexual organs are the testis and the ovary; it is the
object of conjugation to bring into contact the sperm from the testis with
the germ from the ovary. There is no reason to suppose that the germ-cell
and the sperm-cell are essentially different from each other. Sexual
conjugation thus remains a process which is radically the same as the
non-sexual mode of propagation which preceded it. The fusion of the nuclei
of the two cells was regarded by Van Beneden, who in 1875 first accurately
described it, as a process of conjugation comparable to that of the
protozoa and the protophyta. Boveri, who has further extended our
knowledge of the process, considers that the spermatozoon removes an
inhibitory influence preventing the commencement of development in the
ovum; the spermatozoon replaces a portion of the ovum which has already
undergone degeneration, so that the object of conjugation is chiefly to
effect the union of the properties of two cells in one, sexual
fertilization achieving a division of labor with reciprocal inhibition;
the two cells have renounced their original faculty of separate
development in order to attain a fusion of qualities and thus render
possible that production of new forms and qualities which has involved the
progress of the organized world.[74]

While in fishes this conjugation of the male and female elements is
usually ensured by the female casting her spawn into an artificial nest
outside the body, on to which the male sheds his milt, in all animals
(and, to some extent, birds, who occupy an intermediate position) there is
an organic nest, or incubation chamber as Bland Sutton terms it, the womb,
in the female body, wherein the fertilized egg may develop to a high
degree of maturity sheltered from those manifold risks of the external
world which make it necessary for the spawn of fishes to be so enormous in
amount. Since, however, men and women have descended from remote ancestors
who, in the manner of aquatic creatures, exercised functions of
sperm-extrusion and germ-extrusion that were exactly analogous in the two
sexes, without any specialized female uterine organization, the early
stages of human male and female foetal development still display the
comparatively undifferentiated sexual organization of those remote
ancestors, and during the first months of foetal life it is practically
impossible to tell by the inspection of the genital regions whether the
embryo would have developed into a man or into a woman. If we examine the
embryo at an early stage of development we see that the hind end is the
body stalk, this stalk in later stages becoming part of the umbilical
cord. The urogenital region, formed by the rapid extension of the hind
end beyond its original limit, which corresponds to what is later the
umbilicus, develops mainly by the gradual differentiation of structures
(the Wolffian and Muellerian bodies) which originally exist identically in
both sexes. This process of sexual differentiation is highly complex, so
that it cannot yet be said that there is complete agreement among
investigators as to its details. When some irregularity or arrest of
development occurs in the process we have one or other of the numerous
malformations which may affect this region. If the arrest occurs at a very
early stage we may even find a condition of things which seems to
approximate to that which normally exists in the adult reptilia.[75] Owing
to the fact that both male and female organs develop from more primitive
structures which were sexually undifferentiated, a fundamental analogy in
the sexual organs of the sexes always remains; the developed organs of one
sex exist as rudiments in the other sex; the testicles correspond to the
ovaries; the female clitoris is the homologue of the male penis; the
scrotum of one sex is the labia majora in the other sex, and so
throughout, although it is not always possible at present to be quite
certain in regard to these homologics.

Since the object to be attained by the sexual organs in the human species
is identical with that which they subserve in their pre-human ancestors,
it is not surprising to find that these structures have a clear
resemblance to the corresponding structures in the apes, although on the
whole there would appear to be in man a higher degree of sexual
differentiation. Thus the uterus of various species of _semnopithecus_
seems to show a noteworthy correspondence with the same organ in
woman.[76] The somewhat less degree of sexual differentiation is well
shown in the gorilla; in the male the external organs are in the passive
state covered by the wrinkled skin of the abdomen, while in the female,
on the contrary, they are very apparent, and in sexual excitement the
large clitoris and nymphae become markedly prominent. The penis of the
gorilla, however, more nearly resembles that of man, according to
Hartmann, than does that of the other anthropoid apes, which diverge from
the human type in this respect more than do the cynocephalic apes and some
species of baboon.

From the psychological point of view we are less interested in the
internal sexual organs, which are most fundamentally concerned with the
production and reception of the sexual elements, than with the more
external parts of the genital apparatus which serve as the instruments of
sexual excitation, and the channels for the intromission and passage of
the seminal fluid. It is these only which can play any part at all in
sexual selection; they are the only part of the sexual apparatus which can
enter into the formation of either normal or abnormal erotic conceptions;
they are the organs most prominently concerned with detumescence; they
alone enter normally into the conscious process of sex at any time. It
seems desirable, therefore, to discuss them briefly at this point.

    Our knowledge of the individual and racial variations of the
    external sexual organs is still extremely imperfect. A few
    monographs and collections of data on isolated points may be
    found in more or less inaccessible publications. As regards
    women, Ploss and Bartels have devoted a chapter to the sexual
    organs of women which extends to a hundred pages, but remains
    scanty and fragmentary. (_Das Weib_, vol. i, Chapter VI.) The
    most systematic series of observations have been made in the case
    of the various kinds of degenerates--idiots, the insane,
    criminals, etc.--but it would be obviously unsafe to rely too
    absolutely on such investigations for our knowledge of the sexual
    organs of the ordinary population.

    There can be no doubt, however, that the external sexual organs
    in normal men and women exhibit a peculiarly wide range of
    variation. This is indicated not only by the unsystematic results
    attained by experienced observers, but also by more systematic
    studies. Thus Herman has shown by detailed measurements that
    there are great normal variations in the conformation of the
    parts that form the floor of the female pelvis. He found that the
    projection of the pelvic floor varied from nothing to as much as
    two inches, and that in healthy women who had borne no children
    the distance between the coccyx and anus, the length of the
    perineum, the distance between the fourchette and the symphysis
    pubis, and the length of the vagina are subject to wide
    variations. (_Lancet_, October 12, 1889.) Even the female
    urethral opening varies very greatly, as has been shown by Bergh,
    who investigated it in nearly 700 women and reproduces the
    various shapes found; while most usually (in about a third of the
    cases observed), a longitudinal slit, it may be cross-shaped,
    star-shaped, crescentic, etc.; and while sometimes very small, in
    about 6 per cent. of the cases it admitted the tip of the little
    finger. (Bergh, _Monatsheft fuer Praktische Dermatologie_, 15
    Sept., 1897.)

    As regards both sexes, Stanley Hall states that "Dr. F.N.
    Seerley, who has examined over 2000 normal young men as well as
    many young women, tells me that in his opinion individual
    variations in these parts are much greater even than those of
    face and form, and that the range of adult and apparently normal
    size and proportion, as well as function, and of both the age and
    order of development, not only of each of the several parts
    themselves, but of all their immediate annexes, and in females as
    well as males, is far greater than has been recognized by any
    writer. This fact is the basis of the anxieties and fears of
    morphological abnormality so frequent during adolescence." (G.S.
    Hall, _Adolescence_, vol. i, p. 414).

In accordance with the supreme importance of the part they play, and the
intimately psychic nature of that part, the sexual organs, both internal
and external, are very richly supplied with nerves. While the internal
organs are very abundantly furnished with sympathetic nerves and ganglia,
the external organs show the highest possible degree of specialization of
the various peripheral nervous devices which the organism has developed
for receiving, accumulating, and transmitting stimuli to the brain.[77]

    "The number of conducting cords which attach the genitals to the
    nervous centers is simply enormous," writes Bryan Robinson; "the
    pudic nerve is composed of nearly all the third sacral and
    branches from the second and fourth sacral. As one examines this
    nerve he is forced to the conclusion that it is an enormous
    supply for a small organ. The periphery of the pudic nerve
    spreads itself like a fan over the genitals." The lesser sciatic
    nerve supplies only one muscle--the gluteus maximus--and then
    sends the large pudendal branch to the side of the penis, and
    hence the friction of coitus induces active contraction of the
    gluteus maximus, "the main muscle of coition." The large pudic
    and the pudendal constitute the main supply of the external
    genitals. In women the pudic nerve is equally large, but the
    pudendal much smaller, possibly, Bryan Robinson suggests, because
    women take a less active part in coitus. The nerve supply of the
    clitoris, however, is three or four times as large as that of the
    penis in proportion to size. (F.B. Robinson, "The Intimate
    Nervous Connection of the Genito-Urinary Organs With the
    Cerebro-Spinal and Sympathetic Systems," _New York Medical
    Journal_, March 11, 1893; id., _The Abdominal Brain_, 1899.)

Of all the sexual organs the penis is without doubt that which has most
powerfully impressed the human imagination. It is the very emblem of
generation, and everywhere men have contemplated it with a mixture of
reverence and shuddering awe that has sometimes, even among civilized
peoples, amounted to horror and disgust. Its image is worn as an amulet to
ward off evil and invoked as a charm to call forth blessing. The sexual
organs were once the most sacred object on which a man could place his
hands to swear an inviolate oath, just as now he takes up the Testament.
Even in the traditions of the great classic civilization which we inherit
the penis is _fascinus_, the symbol of all fascination. In the history of
human culture it has had far more than a merely human significance; it has
been the symbol of all the generative force of Nature, the embodiment of
creative energy in the animal and vegetable worlds alike, an image to be
held aloft for worship, the sign of all unconscious ecstasy. As a symbol,
the sacred phallus, it has been woven in and out of all the highest and
deepest human conceptions, so intimately that it is possible to see it
everywhere, that it is possible to fail to see it anywhere.

In correspondence with the importance of the penis is the large number of
names which men have everywhere bestowed upon it. In French literature
many hundred synonyms may be found. They were also numerous in Latin. In
English the literary terms for the penis seem to be comparatively few, but
a large number of non-literary synonyms exist in colloquial and perhaps
merely local usage. The Latin term penis, which has established itself
among us as the most correct designation, is generally considered to be
associated with _pendere_ and to be connected therefore with the usually
pendent position of the organ. In the middle ages the general literary
term throughout Europe was _coles_ (or _colis_) from _caulis_, a stalk,
and _virga_, a rod. The only serious English literary term, yard (exactly
equivalent to _virga_), as used by Chaucer--almost the last great English
writer whose vocabulary was adequate to the central facts of life--has now
fallen out of literary and even colloquial usage.

    Pierer and Chaulant, in their anatomical and physiological
    _Real-Lexicon_ (vol. vi, p. 134), give nearly a hundred synonyms
    for the penis. Hyrtl (_Topographisches Anatomie_, seventh
    edition, vol. ii, pp. 67-69), adds others. Schurig, in his
    _Spermatologia_ (1720, pp. 89-91), also presents a number of
    names for the penis; in Chapter III (pp. 189-192) of the same
    book he discusses the penis generally with more fullness than
    most authors. Louis de Landes, in his _Glossaire Erotique_ of the
    French language (pp. 239-242), enumerates several hundred
    literary synonyms for the penis, though many of them probably
    only occur once.

    There is no thorough and comprehensive modern study of the penis
    on an anthropological basis (though I should mention a valuable
    and fully illustrated study of anthropological and pathological
    variations of the penis in a series of articles by Marandon de
    Montyel, "Des Anomalies des Organs Genitaux Externes Chez les
    Alienees," etc., _Archives d'Anthropologie Criminelle_, 1895),
    and it would be out of place here to attempt to collect the
    scattered notices regarding racial and other variations. It may
    suffice to note some of the evidence showing that such variations
    seem to be numerous and important. The Arab penis (according to
    Kocher) is slender and long (a third longer than the average
    European penis) and with a club-shaped glans. It undergoes little
    change when it enters the erect state. The clothes leaves it
    quite free, and the Arab practices manual excitement at an early
    age to favor its development.

    Among the Fuegians, also, according to Hyades and Deniker (_Cap
    Horn_, vol. vii, p. 153), the average length of the penis is 77
    millimeters, which is longer than in Europeans.

    In men of black race, also, the penis is decidedly large. Thus
    Sir H.H. Johnston (_British Central Africa_, p. 399) states this
    to be a universal rule. Among the Wankenda of Northern Nyassa,
    for instance, he remarks that, while the body is of medium size,
    the penis is generally large. He gives the usual length as about
    six inches, reaching nine or ten in erection. The prepuce, it is
    added, is often very long, and circumcision is practiced by many
    tribes.

    Among the American negroes Hrdlicka has found, also (_Proceedings
    American Association for the Advancement of Science_, vol. xlvii,
    p. 475), that the penis in black boys is larger than in white
    boys.

    The passages cited above suggest the question whether the penis
    becomes larger by exercise of its generative functions. Most old
    authors assert that frequent erection makes the penis large and
    long (Schurig, _Spermatologia_, p. 107). Galen noted that in
    singers and athletes, who were chaste in order to preserve their
    strength, the sexual parts were small and rugrose, like those of
    old men, and that exercise of the organs from youth develops
    them; Roubaud, quoting this observation (_Traite de
    l'Impuissance_, p. 373), agrees with the statement. It seems
    probable that there is an element of truth in this ancient
    belief. At the same time it must be remembered that the penis is
    only to small extent a muscular organ, and that the increase of
    size produced by frequent congestion of erectile tissues cannot
    be either rapid or pronounced. Variations in the size of the
    sexual organs are probably on the whole mainly inherited, though
    it is impossible to speak decisively on this point until more
    systematic observations become customary.

The scrotum has usually, in the human imagination, been regarded merely as
an appendage of the penis, of secondary importance, although it is the
garment of the primary and essential organs of sex, and the fact that it
is not the seat of any voluptuous sensation has doubtless helped to
confirm this position. Even the name is merely a mediaeval perversion of
_scortum_, skin or hide. In classic times it was usually called the pouch
or purse. The importance of the testicles has not, however, been
altogether ignored, as the very word _testis_ itself shows, for the
_testis_ is simply the _witness_ of virility.[78]

It is easy to understand why the penis should occupy this special place in
man's thoughts as the supreme sexual organ. It is the one conspicuous and
prominent portion of the sexual apparatus, while its aptitude for swelling
and erecting itself involuntarily, under the influence of sexual emotion,
gives it a peculiar and almost unique position in the body. At the same
time it is the point at which, in the male body, all voluptuous sensation
is concentrated, the only normal masculine center of sex.[79]

It is not easy to find any correspondingly conspicuous symbol of sex in
the sexual region of women. In the normal position nothing is visible but
the peculiarly human cushion of fat picturesquely termed the Mons Veneris
(because, as Palfyn said, all those who enroll themselves under the banner
of Venus must necessarily scale it), and even that is veiled from view in
the adult by the more or less bushy plantation of hair which grows upon
it. A triangle of varyingly precise definition is thus formed at the lower
apex of the trunk, and this would sometimes appear to have been regarded
as a feminine symbol.[80] But the more usual and typical symbol of
femininity is the idealized ring (by some savages drawn as a lozenge) of
the vulvar opening--the _yoni_ corresponding to the masculine
_lingam_--which is normally closed from view by the larger lips arising
from beneath the shadow of the _mons_. It is a symbol that, like the
masculine phallus, has a double meaning among primitive peoples and is
sometimes used to call down a blessing and sometimes to invoke a
curse.[81]

This external opening of the feminine genital passage with its two
enclosing lips is now generally called the vulva. It would appear that
originally (as by Celsus and Pliny) this term included the womb, also, but
when the term "uterus" came into use "vulva" was confined (as its sense of
folding doors suggests that it should be) to the external entrance. The
classic term _cunnus_ for the external genitals was chiefly used by the
poets; it has been the etymological source of various European names for
this region, such as the old French _con_, which has now, however,
disappeared from literature while even in popular usage it has given place
to _lapin_ and similar terms. But there is always a tendency, marked in
most parts of the world, for the names of the external female parts to
become indecorous. Even in classic antiquity this part was the _pudendum_,
the part to be ashamed of, and among ourselves the mass of the
population, still preserving the traditions of primitive times, continue
to cherish the same notion.

    The anatomy, anthropology, folk-lore, and terminology of the
    external and to some extent the internal feminine sexual region
    may be studied in the following publications, among others:
    Ploss, _Das Weib_, vol. i, Chapter VI; Hyrtl, _Topographisches
    Anatomie_, vol. ii, and other publications by the same scholarly
    anatomist; W.J. Stewart Mackay, _History of Ancient Gynaecology_,
    especially pp. 244-250; R. Bergh, "Symbolae ad Cognitionem
    Genitalium Externorum Foeminearum" (in Danish),
    _Hospitalstidende_, August, 1894; and also in _Monatshefte fuer
    Praktische Dermatologie_, 1897. D.S. Lamb, "The Female External
    Genital Organs," _New York Journal of Gynaecology_, August, 1894;
    R.L. Dickinson, "Hypertrophies of the Labia Minora and Their
    Significance," _American Gynecology_, September, 1902; Kryptadia
    (in various languages), vol. viii, pp. 3-11, 11-13, and many
    other passages. Several of Schurig's works (especially
    _Gynaecologia_, _Muliebria_, and _Parthenologia_) contain full
    summaries of the statements of the early writers.

The external or larger lips, like the mons veneris, are specifically human
in their full development, for in the anthropoid apes they are small as is
the mons, and in the lower apes absent altogether; they are, moreover,
larger in the white than in the other human races. Thus in the negro, and
to a less degree in the Japanese (Wernich) and the Javanese (Scherzer)
they are less developed than in women of white race. The greater lips
develop in the foetus later than the lesser lips, which are thus at first
uncovered; this condition thus constitutes an infantile state which
occasionally (in less than 2 per cent. of cases, according to Bergh)
persists in the adult. Their generally accepted name, labia majora, is
comparatively modern.[82]

    The outer sides of the labia majora are covered with hair, and on
    the inner sides, which are smooth and moist, but are not true
    mucous membrane, there are a few sweat glands and numerous large
    sebaceous glands. Bergh considers that there is little or no hair
    on the inner sides of the labia majora, but Lamb states that
    careful examination shows that from one- to two-thirds of the
    inner surface in adult women show hairs like those of the
    external surface. In brunettes and women of dark races this
    surface is pigmented; in dark races it is usually a slate gray.
    From an examination of 2200 young Danish prostitutes Bergh has
    found that there are two main varieties in the shape of the labia
    majora, with transitional forms. In the first and most frequent
    form the labia tend to be less marked and more effaced and
    separated at the upper and anterior part, often being lost in the
    sides of the mons and presenting a fissure which is broader in
    its upper part and showing the inner lips more or less bare. In
    the second form the labia are thicker and more outstanding and
    the inner edges lie in contact throughout their whole length,
    showing the _rima pudendi_ as a long narrow fissure. Whatever the
    form, the labia close more tightly together in virgins and in
    young individuals generally than in the deflowered and the
    elderly. In children, as Martineau pointed out, the vulva appears
    to look directly forward and the clitoris and urinary meatus
    easily appear, while in adult women, and especially after
    attempts at coitus have been made, the vulva appears directed
    more below and behind, and the clitoris and meatus more covered
    by the labia majora; so that the child urinates forward, while
    the adult woman is usually able to urinate almost directly
    downwards in the erect position, though in some cases (as may
    occasionally be observed in the street) she can only do so when
    bending slightly forwards. This difference in the direction of
    the stream formerly furnished one of the methods of diagnosing
    virginity, an uncertain one, since the difference is largely due
    to age and individual variation. The main factor in the position
    and aspect of the vulva is pelvic inclination. (See Havelock
    Ellis, _Man and Woman_, fourth edition, p. 64; Stratz, _Die
    Schoenheit des Weiblichen Koerpers_, Chapter XII.) In the European
    woman, according to Stratz, a considerable degree of pelvic
    inclination is essential to beauty, concealing all but the
    anterior third of the vulva. In negresses and other women of
    lower race the vulva, however, usually lies further back, being
    more conspicuous from behind than in European women; in this
    respect lower races resemble the apes. Those women of dark race,
    therefore, whose modesty is focused behind rather than in front
    thus have sound anatomical considerations on their side.

    As Ploss and Bartels remark, a very common variation among
    European women consists in an unusually posterior position of the
    vulva and vaginal entrance, so that unless a cushion is placed
    under the buttocks it is difficult for the man to effect coitus
    in the usual position without giving much pain to the woman. They
    add that another anomaly, less easy to remedy, consists in an
    abnormally anterior position of the vaginal entrance close
    beneath the pelvic bone, so that, although intromission is easy,
    the spasmodic contraction of the vagina at the culmination of
    orgasm presses the penis against the bone and causes intolerable
    pain to the man.

The mons veneris and the labia majora are, after the age of puberty,
always normally covered by a more or less profuse growth of hair. It is
notable that the apes, notwithstanding their general tendency to
hairiness, show no such special development of hair in this region. We
thus see that all the external and more conspicuous portions of the sexual
sphere in woman--the mons veneris, the labia majora, and the
hair--represent not so much an animal inheritance, such as we commonly
misrepresent them to be, but a higher and genuinely human development. As
none of these structures subserve any clear practical use, it would appear
that they must have developed by sexual selection to satisfy the aesthetic
demands of the eye.[83]

    The character and arrangement of the pubic hair, investigated by
    Eschricht and Voigt more than half a century ago, have been more
    recently studied by Bergh. As these observers have pointed out,
    there are various converging hair streams from above and below,
    the clitoris seeming to be the center towards which they are
    directed. The hair-covering thus formed is usually ample and, as
    a rule, is more so in brunettes than in blondes. It is nearly
    always bent, curly and more or less spirally twisted.[84] There
    are frequently one or two curls at the commencement of the
    fissure, rolled outwards, and occasionally a well marked tuft in
    the middle line. In abundance the pubic hair corresponds with the
    axillary hair; when one region is defective in hair the other is
    usually so also. Strong eyebrows also usually indicate a strong
    development of pubic hair. But the hair of the head usually
    varies independently, and Bergh found that of 154 women with
    spare pubic hair 72 had good and often profuse hair on the head.
    Complete or almost complete absence of pubic hair is in Bergh's
    experience only found in about 3 per cent. of women; these were
    all young and blonde.

Rothe, in his investigation of the pubic hair of 1000 Berlin women, found
that no two women were really alike in this respect, but there was a
tendency to two main types of arrangement, with minor subdivisions,
according as the hair tended to grow chiefly in the middle line extending
laterally from that line, or to grow equally over the whole extent of the
pubic region; these two groups included half the cases investigated.

    In men the pubic hair normally ascends anteriorly in a faint line
    up to the navel, with tendency to form a triangle with the apex
    above, and posteriorly extends backwards to the anus. In women
    these anterior and posterior extensions are comparatively rare,
    or at all events are only represented by a few stray hairs. Rothe
    found this variation in 4 per cent. of North German women, though
    a triangle of hair was only found in 2 per cent.; Lombroso found
    it in 5 per cent, of Italian women; Bergh found it in only 1.6
    per cent. among 1000 Danish prostitutes, all sixteen of whom with
    three exceptions were brunettes. In Vienna, among 600 women, Coe
    found only 1 per cent, with this distribution of hair, and states
    that they were women of decidedly masculine type, though Ploss
    and Bartels, as well as Rothe, find, however, that heterogeny, as
    they term the masculine distribution, is more common in blondes.
    The anterior extension of hair is usually accompanied by the
    posterior extension around the anus, usually very slight, but
    occasionally as pronounce as in men. (According to Rothe,
    however, anterior heterogeny comparatively rare.) These masculine
    variations in the extension of the pubic hair appear to be not
    uncommonly associated with other physical and psychic anomalies;
    it is on this account that they have sometimes been regarded as
    indications of a vicious or a criminal temperament; they are,
    however, found in quite normal women.

    The pubic hair of women is usually shorter than that of men, but
    thick, and the individual hairs stronger and larger in diameter
    than those of men, as Pfaff first showed; dark hair is usually
    stronger than light. In both length and size the individual
    variations are considerable. The usual length is about 2 inches,
    or 3-5 centimeters, occasionally reaching about 4 inches, or 9-10
    centimeters, in the larger curls. In a series of 100 women
    attended during confinement in London and the north of England I
    have only once (in a rather blonde Lancashire woman) found the
    hair on labia reaching a conspicuous length of several inches and
    forming an obstruction to the manipulations involved in delivery.
    But Jahn delivered a woman whose pubic hair was longer than that
    of her head, reaching below her knee; Paulini also knew a woman
    whose pubic hair nearly reached her knees and was sold to make
    wigs; Bartholin mentions a soldier's wife who plaited her pubic
    hair behind her back; while Brantome has several references to
    abnormally long hair in ladies of the French court during the
    sixteenth century. In 8 cases out of 2200 Bergh found the pubic
    hair forming a large curly wig extending to the iliac spines. The
    individual hairs have occasionally been found so stiff and
    brush-like as to render coitus difficult.

    In color the pubic hair, while generally approximating to that of
    the head, is sometimes (according to Rothe, in Germany, in
    one-third cases) lighter, and sometimes somewhat darker, as is
    found to be the case by Coe, especially in brunettes, and also by
    Bergh, in Denmark. Bergh remarks that it is generally
    intermediate in color between the eyebrows and the axillary hair,
    the latter being more or less decolorized by sweat, and that,
    owing to the influence of the urine and vaginal discharges, the
    labial hair is paler than that on the mons; blondes with dark
    eyebrows usually have dark hair on the mons. The hair on this
    spot, as Aristotle observed, is usually the last to turn gray.

The key to the genital apparatus in women from the psychic point of view,
and, indeed, to some extent, its anatomical center, is to be found in the
clitoris. Anatomically and developmentally the clitoris is the rudimentary
analogue of the masculine penis. Functionally, however, its scope is very
much smaller. While the penis both receives and imparts specific
voluptuous sensations, and is at the same time both the intromittent organ
for the semen and the conduit for the urine, the sole function of the
clitoris is to enter into erection under the stress of sexual emotion and
receive and transmit the stimulatory voluptuous sensations imparted to it
by friction with the masculine genital apparatus. It is so insignificant
an organ that it is only within recent times that its homology with the
penis has been realized. In 1844 Kobelt wrote in his important book, _Die
Mannlichen und Weiblichen Wollust-Organe_, that in his attempt to show
that the female organs are exactly analogous to the male the reader will
probably be unable to follow him, while even Johannes Mueller, the father
of scientific physiology, declared at about the same period that the
clitoris is essentially different from the penis. It is indeed but three
centuries since the clitoris was so little known that (in 1593) Realdus
Columbus actually claimed the honor of discovering it. Columbus was not
its discoverer, for Fallopius speedily showed that Avicenna and Albucasis
had referred to it.[85] The Arabs appear to have been very familiar with
it, and, from the various names they gave it, clearly understood the
important part it plays in generating voluptuous emotion.[86] But it was
known in classic antiquity; the Greeks called it myrton, the myrtle-berry;
Galen and Soranus called it nymphe because it is covered as a bride is
veiled, while the old Latin name was _tentigo_, from its power of entering
into erection, and _columella_, the little pillar, from its shape. The
modern term, which is Greek and refers to the sensitiveness of the part to
voluptuous titillation, is said to have originated with Suidas and
Pollux.[87] It was mentioned, though not adopted, by Rufus.

"The clitoris," declared Haller, "is a part extremely sensible and
wonderfully prurient." It is certainly the chief though by no means the
only point through which the immediate call to detumescence is conveyed to
the female organism. It is, indeed, as Bryan Robinson remarks, "a
veritable electrical bell button which, being pressed or irritated, rings
up the whole nervous system."

    The nervous supply of this little organ is very large, and the
    dorsal nerve of the clitoris is relatively three or four times
    larger than that of the penis. Yet the sensitive point of this
    organ is only 5 to 7 millimeters in extent. The length of the
    clitoris is usually rather over 2 centimeters (or about an inch)
    and 3 centimeters when erect; a length of 4 centimeters or more
    was regarded by Martineau as within the normal range of
    variation. It is not usual to find the clitoris longer than this
    in Europe (for among some races like the negro the clitoris is
    generally large), but all degrees of magnitude may be found as
    rare exceptions. (See, e.g., Sir J.Y. Simpson, "Hermaphrodites,"
    _Obstetric Memoirs and Contributions_, vol. ii, pp. 217-226; also
    Dickinson, loc. cit.) It was formerly thought that the clitoris
    is easily enlarged by masturbation, and Martineau believed that
    in this way it might be doubled in length. It is probable that
    slight enlargement of the clitoris may be caused by very
    frequent masturbation, but only to an insignificant extent, and
    it is impossible to diagnose masturbation from the size of the
    clitoris. Among the women of Lake Nyassa, as well as in the
    Caroline Islands, special methods are practiced for elongating
    the clitoris, but in Europe, at all events, it is probable that
    the variations in the size of the organ are mainly congenital. It
    may well be that a congenitally large clitoris is associated with
    an abnormally developed excitability of the sexual apparatus.
    Tilt stated (_On Uterine and Ovarian Inflammation_, p. 37) that
    in his experience there was a frequent though not invariable
    connection between a large clitoris and sexual proclivity.
    (Schurig referred to a case of intense and life-long sexual
    obsession associated with an extremely large clitoris,
    _Gynaecologia_, pp. 16-17.) Of recent years considerable
    importance has been attached by some gynecologists (e.g., R.T.
    Morris, "Is Evolution Trying to Do Away With the Clitoris?"
    _Transactions American Association of Obstetricians and
    Gynecologists_, vol. v, 1893) to preputial adhesions around the
    clitoris as a source of nervous disturbance and invalidism in
    young women.

While the clitoris is anatomically analogous to the penis, its actual
mechanism under the stress of sexual excitement is somewhat different. As
Lietaud long since pointed out, it cannot rise freely in erection as the
penis can; it is apparently bound down by its prepuce and its frenulum.
Waldeyer, in his book on the pelvis, states more precisely that, unlike
the penis, when erect it retains its angle, only this becomes somewhat
rounded so that the organ is to some slight extent lifted and protruded.
Waldeyer considered that the clitoris was thus perfectly fitted to fulfill
its part as the recipient of erotic stimulation from friction by the
penis. Adler, however, has pointed out with considerable justice, that
this is not altogether the case. The clitoris was developed in mammals who
practiced the posterior mode of coitus; in this position the clitoris was
beneath the penis, which was thus easily able in coitus to press it
against the pubic bone close beneath which it is situated, and thus impart
the compression and friction which the feminine organ craves. But in the
human anterior mode of coitus it is not necessarily brought into close
contact with the penis during the act of coitus, and thus fails to receive
powerful stimulation. Its restricted position, which is an advantage in
posterior coitus, is a disadvantage in anterior coitus. Adler observes
that it thus comes about that the human method of coitus, while by
bringing breast to breast and face to face it has added a new dignity and
refinement, a fresh source of enjoyment, to the embrace of the sexes, has
not been an unmixed advantage to woman, for while man has lost nothing by
the change, woman has now to contend with an increased difficulty in
attaining an adequate amount of pressure on that "electric button" which
normally sets the whole mechanism in operation.[88]

We may well bring into connection with the changed conditions brought
about by anterior coitus the interesting fact that while the clitoris
remains the most exquisitely sensitive of the sexual centers in woman,
voluptuous sensitivity is much more widely diffused in woman than in man.
Over the whole body, indeed, it is apt to be more distinctly marked than
is usually the case in man. But even if we confine ourselves to the
genital region, while in man that portion of the penis which enters the
vagina, and especially the glans, is normally the only portion which, even
during turgescence, is sensitive to voluptuous contacts, in woman the
whole of the region comprised within the larger lips, including even the
anus and internally the vagina and the vaginal portion of the womb,[89]
become sensitive to voluptuous contacts. Deprived of the penis the ability
of a man to experience specifically sexual sensations becomes very limited
indeed. But the loss of the clitoris or of any other structure involves no
correspondingly serious disability on women. Ablation of the clitoris for
sexual hyperaesthesia has for this reason been abandoned, except under
special circumstances. The members of the Russian Skoptzy sect habitually
amputate the clitoris, nymphae, and breasts, yet many young Skoptzy women
told the Russian physician, Guttceit, that they were perfectly well able
to enjoy coitus.

    Freud believes that in very young girls the clitoris is the
    exclusive seat of sexual sensation, masturbation at this age
    being directed to the clitoris alone, and spontaneous sexual
    excitement being confined to twitchings and erection of this
    organ, so that young girls are able, from their own experience,
    to recognize without instruction the signs of sexual excitement
    in boys. At a later age sexual excitability spreads from the
    clitoris to other regions--just as the easy inflammability of
    wood sets light to coal--though in the male the penis remains
    from first to last normally the almost exclusive seat of specific
    excitability. (S. Freud, _Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie_,
    p. 62.)

    The anus would, however, seem to be sometimes an erogenous zone
    even at an early age. Titillation of the anus appears to be
    frequently pleasurable in women; and this is not surprising
    considering the high degree of erotic sensitivity which is easily
    developed at the body orifices where skin meets mucous membrane.
    (Thus the meatus of the urethra is a highly erogenous zone, as is
    sufficiently shown by the frequency with which hair-pins and
    other articles used in masturbation find their way into the
    bladder.) It is in this germinal sensitivity, undoubtedly, that
    we find a chief key to the practice of _pedicatio_. Freud
    attaches great importance to the anus as a sexually erogenous
    zone at a very early age, and considers that it very frequently
    makes its influence felt in this respect. He believes that
    intestinal catarrhs in very early life and haemorrhoids later tend
    to develop sensibility in the anus. He finds an indication that
    the anus has become a sexually erogenous zone when children wish
    to allow the contents of the rectum to accumulate so that
    defecation may by its increased difficulty involve voluptuous
    sensations, and adds that masturbatory excitation of the anus
    with the fingers is by no means rare in older children. (S.
    Freud, _Op. cit._, pp. 40-42.) A medical correspondent in India
    tells me of a European lady who derived, she said, "quite as
    much, indeed more," pleasure from digitally titillating her
    rectum as from vulvo-vaginal titillation; she had several times
    submitted to _pedicatio_ and enjoyed it, though it was painful
    during penetration. The anus may retain this erogenous
    irritability even in old age, and Routh mentions the case of a
    lady of over 70, the reverse of lustful, who was so excited by
    the act of defecation that she was invariably compelled to
    masturbate, although this state of things was a source of great
    mental misery to her. (C.H.F. Routh, _British Gynaecological
    Journal_, February, 1887, p. 48.)

    Boelsche has sought the explanation of the erogenous nature of the
    anus, and the key to _pedicatio_, in an atavistic return to the
    very remote amphibian days when the anus was combined with the
    sexual parts in a common cloaca. But it is unnecessary to invoke
    any vestigial inheritance from a vastly remote past when we bear
    in mind that the innervation of these two adjoining regions is
    inevitably very closely related. The presence of a body exit with
    its marked and special sensitivity at a point where it can
    scarcely fail to receive the nervous overflow from an immensely
    active center of nervous energy quite adequately accounts for the
    phenomenon in question.

The inner lips, the nymphae or labia minora, running parallel with the
greater lips which enclose them, embrace the clitoris anteriorly and
extend backward, enclosing the urethral exit between them as well as the
vaginal entrance. They form little wings whence their old Latin name,
_alae_, and from their resemblance to the cock's comb were by Spigelius
termed crista galli. The red and (especially in brunettes) dark appearance
of the nymphae suggests that they are mucous membrane and not
integumentary; it is, however, now considered that even on the inner
surface they are covered by skin and separated from the mucous membrane by
a line.[90] In structure, as described by Waldeyer, they consist of fine
connective tissue rich in elastic fibers as well as some muscular tissue,
and full of large veins, so that they are capable of a considerable degree
of turgescence resembling erection during sexual excitement, while
Ballantyne finds that the nymphae are supplied to a notable extent with
nervous end-organs.

More than any other part of the sexual apparatus in either sex, the lesser
lips, on account of their shape, their position, and their structure, are
capable of acquired modifications, more especially hypertrophy and
elongation. By stretching, it is stated, a labium can be doubled in its
dimensions. The "Hottentot apron," or elongated nymphae, commonly found
among some peoples in South Africa, has long been a familiar phenomenon.
In such cases a length or transverse diameter of 3 to 5 centimeters is
commonly found. But such elongated nymphae are by no means confined to one
part of the world or to one race; they are quite common among women of
European race, and reach a size equal to most of the more reliably
recorded Hottentot cases. Dickinson, who has very carefully studied this
question in New York, finds that in 1000 consecutive gynaecological cases
the labia showed some form of hypertrophy in 36 per cent., or more than 1
in 3; while among 150 of these cases who were neurasthenic, the proportion
reached 56 per cent., even when minor or doubtful enlargements were
disregarded. Bergh, in about 16 per cent. cases, found very enlarged
nymphae, the height reached in about 5 per cent. of the cases of
enlargement being nearly six centimeters. Ploss and Bartels, in a full
discussion: of the "Hottentot apron," come to the conclusion that this
condition is perhaps in most cases artificially produced. It is known that
among the Basutos it is the custom for the elder girls to manipulate the
nymphae of younger children, when alone with them, almost from birth, and
on account of the elastic nature of these structures such manipulation
quite adequately accounts for the elongation. It is not necessary to
suppose that the custom is practiced for the sake of producing sexual
stimulation--though this may frequently occur--since there are numerous
similar primitive customs involving deformation of the sexual organs
without the production of sexual excitement. Dickinson has come to a
similar conclusion as regards the corresponding elongation of the nymphae
in civilized European women. In 361 out of 1000 women of good social class
he found elongation or thickening, often with a notable degree of
wrinkling and pigmentation, and believes that this is always the result of
frequently repeated masturbation practiced with the separation of the
nymphae; in 30 per cent. of the cases admission of masturbation was
made.[91] While this conclusion is probably correct in the main, it
requires some qualification. To assert that whenever in women who have
not been pregnant the marked protrusion of the inner lips beyond the outer
lips means that at some period manipulation has been practiced with or
without the production of sexual excitement is to make too absolute a
statement. It is highly probable that the nymphae, like the clitoris, are
congenitally more prominent in some of the lower human races, as they are
also in the apes; among the Fuegians, for instance, according to Hyades
and Deniker, the labia minora descend lower than in Europeans, although
there is not the slightest reason to suppose that these women practice any
manipulations. Among European women, again, the nymphae sometimes protrude
very prominently beyond the labia majora in women who are organically of
somewhat infantile type; this occurs in cases in which we may be convinced
that no manipulations have ever been practiced.[92]

It is difficult to speak very decisively as to the function of the labia
minora. They doubtless exert some amount of protective influence over the
entrance to the vagina, and in this way correspond to the lips of the
mouth after which they are called. They fulfill, however, one very
definite though not obviously important function which is indicated by the
mythologic name they have received. There is, indeed, some obscurity in
the origin of this term, nymphae, which has not, I believe, been
satisfactorily cleared up. It has been stated that the Greek name nymphe
has been transferred from the clitoris to the labia minora. Any such
transfer could only have taken place when the meaning of the word had been
forgotten, and nymphe had become the totally different word _nymphae_, the
goddesses who presided over streams. The old anatomists were much
exercised in their minds as to the meaning of the name, but on the whole
were inclined to believe that it referred to the action of the labia
minora in directing the urinary stream. The term nymphae was first applied
in the modern sense, according to Bergh, in 1599, by Pinaeus, mainly from
the influence of these structures on the urinary stream, and he dilated in
his _De Virginitate_ on the suitability of the term to designate so poetic
a spot.[93] In more modern times Luschka and Sir Charles Bell considered
that it is one of the uses of the nymphae to direct the stream of urine,
and Lamb from his own observation thinks the same conclusion probable. In
reality there cannot be the slightest doubt about the function of the
nymphae, as, in Hyrtl's phrase, "the naiads of the urinary source," and it
can be demonstrated by the simplest experiment.[94]

The nymphae form the intermediate portal of the vagina, as the canal which
conducts to the womb was in anatomy first termed (according to Hyrtl) by
De Graaf.[95] It is a secreting, erectile, more or less sensitive canal
lined by what is usually considered mucous membrane, though some have
regarded it as integument of the same character as that of the external
genitals; it certainly resembles such integument more than, for instance,
the mucous membrane of the rectum. In the woman who has never had sexual
intercourse and has been subjected to no manipulations or accidents
affecting this region, the vagina is closed by a last and final gate of
delicate membrane--scarcely admitting more than a slender finger--called
the hymen.

    The poets called the hymen "fios virginitatis," the flower of
    virginity, whence the medico-legal term _defloratio_.
    Notwithstanding the great significance which has long been
    attached to the phenomena connected with it, the hymen was not
    accurately known until Vesalius, Fallopius, and Spigelius
    described and named it. It was, however, recognized by the Arab
    authors, Avicenna and Averroes. The early literature concerning
    it is summarized by Schurig, _Muliebria_, 1729, Section II, cap.
    V. The same author's _Parthenologia_ is devoted to the various
    ancient problems connected with the question of virginity.

To say that this delicate piece of membrane is from the non-physical point
of view a more important structure than any other part of the body is to
convey but a feeble idea of the immense importance of the hymen in the
eyes of the men of many past ages and even of our own times and among our
own people.[96] For the uses of the feminine body, or for its beauty,
there is no part which is more absolutely insignificant. But in human
estimation it has acquired a spiritual value which has made it far more
than a part of the body. It has taken the place of the soul, that whose
presence gives all her worth and dignity, even her name, to the unmarried
woman, her purity, her sexual desirability, her market value. Without
it--though in all physical and mental respects she might remain the same
person--she has sometimes been a mark for contempt, a worthless
outcast.[97]

    So fragile a membrane scarcely possesses the reliability which
    should be possessed by a structure whose presence or absence has
    often meant so much. Its absence by no means necessarily
    signifies that a woman has had intercourse with a man. Its
    presence by no means signifies that she has never had such
    intercourse.

    There are many ways in which the hymen may be destroyed apart
    from coitus. Among the Chinese (and also, it would appear, in
    India and some other parts of the East) the female parts are from
    infancy kept so scrupulously clean by daily washing, the finger
    being introduced into the vagina, that the hymen rapidly
    disappears, and its existence is unknown even to Chinese doctors.
    Among some Brazilian Indians a similar practice exists among
    mothers as regards their young children, less, however, for the
    sake of cleanliness than in order to facilitate sexual
    intercourse in future years. (Ploss and Bartels, _Das Weib_, vol.
    i, Chapter VI.) The manipulations of vaginal masturbation will,
    of course, similarly destroy the hymen. It is also quite possible
    for the hymen to be ruptured by falls and other accidents. (See,
    e.g., a lengthy study by Nina-Rodrigues, "Des Ruptures de l'Hymen
    dans les Chutes," _Annales d'Hygiene Publique_, September, 1903.)

    On the other hand, integrity of the hymen is no proof of
    virginity, apart from the obvious fact that there may be
    intercourse without penetration. (The case has even been recorded
    of a prostitute with syphilitic condylomata, a somewhat masculine
    type of pubic arch, and vulva rather posteriorly placed, whose
    hymen had never been penetrated.) The hymen may be of a yielding
    or folding type, so that complete penetration may take place and
    yet the hymen be afterwards found unruptured. It occasionally
    happens that the hymen is found intact at the end of pregnancy.
    In some, though not all, of these cases there has been conception
    without intromission of the penis. This has occurred even when
    the entrance was very minute. The possibility of such conception
    has long been recognized, and Schurig (_Syllepsilogia_, 1731,
    Section I, cap. VIII, p. 2) quotes ancient authors who have
    recorded cases. For some typical modern cases see Guerard
    (_Centralblatt fuer Gynaekologie_, No. 15, 1895), in one of whose
    cases the hymen of the pregnant woman scarcely admitted a hair;
    also Braun (ib., No. 23, 1895).

The hymen has played a very definite and pronounced part in the social and
moral life of humanity. Until recently it has been more difficult to
decide what precise biological function it has exercised to ensure its
development and preservation. Sexual selection, no doubt, has worked in
its favor, but that influence has been very limited and comparatively very
recent. Virginity is not usually of any value among peoples who are
entirely primitive. Indeed, even in the classic civilization which we
inherit, it is easy to show that the virgin and the admiration for
virginity are of late growth; the virgin goddesses were not originally
virgins in our modern sense. Diana was the many-breasted patroness of
childbirth before she became the chaste and solitary huntress, for the
earliest distinction would appear to have been simply between the woman
who was attached to a man and the woman who followed an earlier rule of
freedom and independence; it was a later notion to suppose that the latter
woman was debarred from sexual intercourse. We certainly must not seek the
origin of the hymen in sexual selection; we must find it in natural
selection. And here it might seem at first sight that we come upon a
contradiction in Nature, for Nature is always devising contrivances to
secure the maximum amount of fertilization. "Increase and multiply" is so
obviously the command of Nature that the Hebrews, with their usual
insight, unhesitatingly dared to place it in the mouth of Jehovah. But the
hymen is a barrier to fertilization. It has, however, always to be
remembered that as we rise in the zooelogical scale, and as the period of
gestation lengthens and the possible number of offspring is fewer, it
becomes constantly more essential that fertilization shall be effective
rather than easy; the fewer the progeny the more necessary it is that they
shall be vigorous enough to survive. There can be little doubt that, as
one or two writers have already suggested, the hymen owes its development
to the fact that its influence is on the side of effective fertilization.
It is an obstacle to the impregnation of the young female by immature,
aged, or feeble males. The hymen is thus an anatomical expression of that
admiration of force which marks the female in her choice of a mate. So
regarded, it is an interesting example of the intimate manner in which
sexual selection is really based on natural selection. Sexual selection is
but the translation into psychic terms of a process which has already
found expression in the physical texture of the body.

    It may be added that this interpretation of the biological
    function of the hymen is supported by the facts of its evolution.
    It is unknown among the lower mammals, with whom fertilization is
    easy, gestation short and offspring numerous. It only begins to
    appear among the higher mammals in whom reproduction is already
    beginning to take on the characters which become fully developed
    in man. Various authors have found traces of a rudimentary hymen,
    not only in apes, but in elephants, horses, donkeys, bitches,
    bears, pigs, hyenas, and giraffes. (Hyrtl, _Op. cit._, vol. ii,
    p. 189; G. Gellhoen, "Anatomy and Development of the Hymen,"
    _American Journal Obstetrics_, August, 1904.) It is in the human
    species that the tendency to limitation of offspring is most
    marked, combined at the same time with a greater aptitude for
    impregnation than exists among any lower mammals. It is here,
    therefore, that a physical check is of most value, and
    accordingly we find that in woman alone, of all animals, is the
    hymen fully developed.


FOOTNOTES:

[72] "Analysis of the Sexual Impulse," in vol. iii of these _Studies_.

[73] "The accomplishment of no other function," Hyrtl remarks, "is so
intimately connected with the mind and yet so independent of it."

[74] The process is still, however, but imperfectly understood; see Art.
"Fecondation," by Ed. Retterer, in Richet's _Dictionnaire de Physiologie_,
vol. vi, 1905.

[75] Thus a male foetus showing reptilian characters in sexual ducts was
exhibited by Shattock at the Pathological Society of London, February 19,
1895.

[76] J. Kohlbrugge, "Die Umgestaltung des Uterus der Affen nach den
Geburt," _Zeitschrift fuer Morphologie_, bd. iv, p. 1, 1901.

[77] There are, however, no special nerve endings (Krause corpuscles), as
was formerly supposed. The nerve endings in the genital region are the
same as elsewhere. The difference lies in the abundance of superposed
arboreal ramifications. See, e.g., Ed. Retterer, Art. "Ejaculation,"
Richet's _Dictionnaire de Physiologie_, vol. v.

[78] Hyrtl, _Op. cit._, vol. ii, p. 39.

[79] Sensations of pleasure without those of touch appear to be normal at
the tip of the penis, as pointed out by Scripture, quoted in _Alienist and
Neurologist_, January, 1898.

[80] See the previous volume of these _Studies_, "Sexual Selection in
Man," p. 161.

[81] See, e.g., Ploss and Bartels, _Das Weib_, vol. i, beginning of
chapter VI.

[82] Hyrtl states that the name _labia_ was first used by Haller in the
middle of the eighteenth century in his _Elements of Physiology_, being
adopted by him from the Greek poet Erotion, who gave these structures the
very obvious name cheilea, lips. But this seems to be a mistake, for the
seventeenth century anatomists certainly used the name "labia" for these
parts.

[83] Bergh tentatively suggests, as regards the pubic hair, that its
appearance may be due to the upright walk in man and the human position
during coitus, the hair preventing irritation of the genitals from the
sweat pouring down from the body and protecting the skin from direct
friction in coitus. (In both these suggestions he was, however, long
previously anticipated by Fabricius ab Aquapendente.) The fanciful
suggestion of Louis Robinson that the pubic hair has developed in order to
enable the human infant to cling securely to his mother is very poorly
supported by facts, and has not met with acceptance. It may be mentioned
that (as stated by Ploss and Bartels) the women of the Bismarck
Archipelago, whose pubic hair is very abundant, use it as a kind of
handkerchief on which to clean their hands.

[84] Routh and Heywood Smith have noted that the pubic hair tends to lose
its curliness and become straight in women who masturbate. (_British
Gynaecological Journal_, February, 1887, p. 505.)

[85] Schurig, _Muliebria_, p. 75. Plazzon in 1621 said that in Italian it
had a popular name, _il besneegio_.

[86] Schurig brought together in his _Gynaecologia_ (pp. 2-4) various early
opinions concerning the clitoris as the seat of voluptuous feeling.

[87] Hyrtl, _Op. cit._, vol. ii, p. 193.

[88] Adler, _Die Mangelhafte Geschlechtsempfindung des Weibes_, 1904, pp.
117-119.

[89] The voluptuous sensations caused by sexual contacts producing
movements of the womb are probably normal and usual. They may even occur
under circumstances unconnected with sexual emotion, and Munde
(_International Journal of Surgery_, March, 1893) mentions incidentally
that in one case while titillating the cervix with a sound the woman very
plainly showed voluptuous manifestations.

[90] Henle stated that fine hairs are frequently visible on the nymphae;
Stieda (_Zeitschrift fuer Morphologie_, 1902, p. 458) remarks that he has
never been able to see them with the naked eye.

[91] R.L. Dickinson, "Hypertrophies of the Labia Minora and Their
Significance," _American Gynaecologist_, September, 1902. It is perhaps
noteworthy that Bergh found that in 302 cases in which the nymphae were of
unequal length, in all but 24 the left was longer.

[92] It may be remarked that Bergh believes that the nymphae, and indeed
the external genitals generally, are congenitally more strongly developed
in libidinous persons, and at the same time in brunettes, while in public
prostitutes this is not usually the case, which confirms the belief that
exalted sexual sensibility does not usually lead to prostitution. He adds
that prostitution, unless carried on for many years, has little effect on
the shape of the external genitals.

[93] Schurig (_Muliebria_, 1729, Section II, cap. II) gives numerous
quotations on this point; thus De Graaf wrote in his book on the sexual
organs of women: "Tales protuberantiae nymphae appellantur ea propter quod
aquis e vesica prosilientibus proxime adstare reperiantur, quandoquidem
inter illas, tanquam duos parietes, urina magno impetu cum sibilo saepe et
absque labiorum irrigatione erumpit, vel quod sint castitatis praesides,
aut sponsam primo intromittant."

[94] Havelock Ellis, "The Bladder as a Dynamometer," _American Journal of
Dermatology_, May, 1902. If a woman who has never been pregnant, standing
in the erect position before commencing the act of urination presses apart
the labia minora with index and middle fingers the stream will be
projected forward so as to fall usually at a considerable distance in
front of a vertical line from the meatus; if when the act is half
completed the fingers are removed, the labia close together and the
stream, though maintained at a constant pressure, at once changes its
character and direction.

[95] In poetry this term was employed by Plautus, _Pseudolus_, Act IV, Sc.
7. The Greek aidoion sometimes meant vagina and sometimes the external
sexual parts; kolpos was used for the vagina alone.

[96] It is curious, however, that the European physicians of the
seventeenth and even eighteenth centuries were doubtful of its value as a
sign of virginity and considered it often absent.

[97] For a summary of the beliefs and practices of various peoples with
regard to the hymen and virginity see Ploss and Bartels, _Das Weib_, vol.
i, Chapter XVI.


