

V.

Exhibitionism--Illustrative Cases--A Symbolic Perversion of Courtship--The
Impulse to Defile--The Exhibitionist's Psychic Attitude--The Sexual Organs
as Fetichs--Phallus Worship--Adolescent Pride in Sexual
Development--Exhibitionism of the Nates--The Classification of the Forms
of Exhibitionism--Nature of the Relationship of Exhibitionism to Epilepsy.


There is a remarkable form of erotic symbolism--very definite and standing
clearly apart from all other forms--in which sexual gratification is
experienced in the simple act of exhibiting the sexual organ to persons of
the opposite sex, usually by preference to young and presumably innocent
persons, very often children. This is termed exhibitionism.[54] It would
appear to be a not very infrequent phenomenon, and most women, once or
more in their lives, especially when young, have encountered a man who has
thus deliberately exposed himself before them.

The exhibitionist, though often a young and apparently vigorous man, is
always satisfied with the mere act of self-exhibition and the emotional
reaction which that act produces; he makes no demands on the woman to whom
he exposes himself; he seldom speaks, he makes no effort to approach her;
as a rule, he fails even to display the signs of sexual excitation. His
desires are completely gratified by the act of exhibition and by the
emotional reaction it arouses in the woman. He departs satisfied and
relieved.

    A case recorded by Schrenck-Notzing very well represents both the
    nature of the impulse felt by the exhibitionist and the way in
    which it may originate. It is the case of a business man of 49,
    of neurotic heredity, an affectionate husband and father of a
    family, who, to his own grief and shame, is compelled from time
    to time to exhibit his sexual organs to women in the street. As a
    boy of 10 a girl of 12 tried to induce him to coitus; both had
    their sexual parts exposed. From that time sexual contacts, as of
    his own naked nates against those of a girl, became attractive,
    as well as games in which the boys and girls in turn marched
    before each other with their sexual parts exposed, and also
    imitation of the copulation of animals. Coitus was first
    practiced about the age of 20, but sight and touch of the woman's
    sexual parts were always necessary to produce sexual excitement.
    It was also necessary--and this consideration is highly important
    as regards the development of the tendency to exhibition--that
    the woman should be excited by the sight of his organs. Even when
    he saw or touched a woman's parts orgasm often occurred. It was
    the naked sexual organs in an otherwise clothed body which
    chiefly excited him. He was not possessed of a high degree of
    potency. Girls between the ages of 10 and 17 chiefly excited him,
    and especially if he felt that they were quite ignorant of sexual
    matters. His self-exhibition was a sort of psychic defloration,
    and it was accompanied by the idea that other people felt as he
    did about the sexual effects of the naked organs, that he was
    shocking but at the same time sexually exciting a young girl. He
    was thus gratifying himself through the belief that he was
    causing sexual gratification to an innocent girl. This man was
    convicted several times, and was finally declared to be suffering
    from impulsive insanity. (Schrenck-Notzing,
    _Kriminal-psychologische und Psycho-pathologische Studien_, 1902,
    pp. 50-57.) In another case of Schrenck-Notzing's, an actor and
    portrait painter, aged 31, in youth masturbated and was fond of
    contemplating the images of the sexual organs of both sexes,
    finding little pleasure in coitus. At the age of 24, at a bathing
    establishment, he happened to occupy a compartment next to that
    occupied by a lady, and when naked he became aware that his
    neighbor was watching him through a chink in the partition. This
    caused him powerful excitement and he was obliged to masturbate.
    Ever since he has had an impulse to exhibit his organs and to
    masturbate in the presence of women. He believes that the sight
    of his organs excites the woman (Ib., pp. 57-68). The presence of
    masturbation in this case renders it untypical as a case of
    exhibitionism. Moll at one time went so far as to assert that
    when masturbation takes place we are not entitled to admit
    exhibitionism, (_Untersuchungen ueber die Libido Sexualis_, bd. i,
    p. 661), but now accepts exhibitionism with masturbation
    ("Perverse Sexualempfindung," _Krankheiten und Ehe_). The act of
    exhibition itself gratifies the sexual impulse, and usually it
    suffices to replace both tumescence and detumescence.

    A fairly typical case, recorded by Krafft-Ebing, is that of a
    German factory worker of 37, a good, sober and intelligent
    workman. His parents were healthy, but one of his mother's and
    also one of his father's sisters were insane; some of his
    relatives are eccentric in religion. He has a languishing
    expression and a smile of self-complacency. He never had any
    severe illness, but has always been eccentric and imaginative,
    much absorbed in romances (such as Dumas's novels) and fond of
    identifying himself with their heroes. No signs of epilepsy. In
    youth moderate masturbation, later moderate coitus. He lives a
    retired life, but is fond of elegant dress and of ornament.
    Though not a drinker, he sometimes makes himself a kind of punch
    which has a sexually exciting effect on him. The impulse to
    exhibitionism has only developed in recent years. When the
    impulse is upon him he becomes hot, his heart beats violently,
    the blood rushes to his head, and he is oblivious of everything
    around him that is not connected with his own act. Afterwards he
    regards himself as a fool and makes vain resolutions never to
    repeat the act. In exhibition the penis is only half erect and
    ejaculation never occurs. (He is only capable of coitus with a
    woman who shows great attraction to him.) He is satisfied with
    self-exhibition, and believes that he thus gives pleasure to the
    woman, since he himself receives pleasure in contemplating a
    woman's sexual parts. His erotic dreams are of self-exhibition to
    young and voluptuous women. He had been previously punished for
    an offense of this kind; medico-legal opinion now recognized the
    incriminated man's psychopathic condition. (Krafft-Ebing, _Op.
    cit._, pp. 492-494.)

    Trochon has reported the case of a married man of 33, a worker in
    a factory, who for several years had exhibited himself at
    intervals to shop-girls, etc., in a state of erection, but
    without speaking or making other advances. He was a hard-working,
    honest, sober man of quiet habits, a good father to his family
    and happy at home. He showed not the slightest sign of insanity.
    But he was taciturn, melancholic and nervous; a sister was an
    idiot. He was arrested, but on the report of the experts that he
    committed these acts from a morbid impulse he could not control
    he was released. (Trochon, _Archives de l'Anthropologie
    Criminelle_, 1888, p. 256.)

    In a case of Freyer's (_Zeitschrift fuer Medizinalbeamte_, third
    year, No. 8) the occasional connection of exhibitionism with
    epilepsy is well illustrated by a barber's assistant, aged 35,
    whose father suffered from chronic alcoholism and was also said
    to have committed the same kind of offense as his son. The mother
    and a sister suffered nervously. From ages of 7 to 18 the subject
    had epileptic convulsions. From 16 to 21 he indulged in normal
    sexual intercourse. At about that time he had often to pass a
    playground and at times would urinate there; it happened that the
    children watched him with curiosity. He noticed that when thus
    watched sexual excitement was caused, inducing erection and even
    ejaculation. He gradually found pleasure in this kind of sexual
    gratification; finally he became indifferent to coitus. His
    erotic dreams, though still usually about normal coitus, were now
    sometimes concerned with exhibition before little girls. When
    overcome by the impulse he could see and hear nothing around him,
    though he did not lose consciousness. After the act was over he
    was troubled by his deed. In all other respects he was entirely
    reasonable. He was imprisoned many times for exhibiting himself
    to young schoolgirls, sometimes vaunting the beauty of his organs
    and inviting inspection. On one occasion he underwent mental
    examination, but was considered to be mentally sound. He was
    finally held to be a hereditarily tainted individual with
    neuropathic constitution. The head was abnormally broad, penis
    small, patellar reflex absent, and there were many signs of
    neurasthenia. (Krafft-Ebing, _Op. cit._, pp. 490-492.)

    The prevalence of epilepsy among exhibitionists is shown by the
    observations of Pelanda in Verona. He has recorded six cases of
    this perversion, all of which eventually reached the asylum and
    were either epileptics or with epileptic relations. One had a
    brother who was also an exhibitionist. In some cases the penis
    was abnormally large, in others abnormally small. Several had
    very weak sexual impulse; one, at the age of 62, had never
    effected coitus, and was proud of the fact that he was still a
    virgin, considering, he would say, the epoch of demoralization in
    which we live. (Pelanda, "Pornopatici," _Archivio di
    Psichiatria_, fasc. ii-iv, 1889.)

    In a very typical case of exhibitionism which Garnier has
    recorded, a certain X., a gentleman engaged in business in Paris,
    had a predilection for exhibiting himself in churches, more
    especially in Saint-Roch. He was arrested several times for
    exposing his sexual organs here before ladies in prayer. In this
    way he finally ruined his commercial position in Paris and was
    obliged to establish himself in a small provincial town. Here
    again he soon exposed himself in a church and was again sent to
    prison, but on his liberation immediately performed the same act
    in the same church in what was described as a most imperturbable
    manner. Compelled to leave the town, he returned to Paris, and in
    a few weeks' time was again arrested for repeating his old
    offense in Saint Roch. When examined by Garnier, the information
    he supplied was vague and incomplete, and he was very embarrassed
    in the attempt to explain himself. He was unable to say why he
    chose a church, but he felt that it was to a church that he must
    go. He had, however, no thought of profanation and no wish to
    give offense. "Quite the contrary!" he declared. He had the sad
    and tired air of a man who is dominated by a force stronger than
    his will. "I know," he added, "what repulsion my conduct must
    inspire. Why am I made thus? Who will cure me?" (P. Garnier,
    "Perversions Sexuelles," _Comptes Rendus_, International Congress
    of Medicine at Paris in 1900, _Section de Psychiatrie_, pp.
    433-435.)

    In some cases, it would appear, the impulse to exhibitionism may
    be overcome or may pass away. This result is the more likely to
    come about in those cases in which exhibitionism has been largely
    conditioned by chronic alcoholism or other influences tending to
    destroy the inhibiting and restraining action of the higher
    centers, which may be overcome by hygiene and treatment. In this
    connection I may bring forward a case which has been communicated
    to me by a medical correspondent in London. It is that of an
    actor, of high standing in his profession and extremely
    intelligent, 49 years of age, married and father of a large
    family. He is sexually vigorous and of erotic temperament. His
    general health has always been good, but he is a high-strung,
    neurotic man, with quick mental reactions. His habits had for a
    long time been decidedly alcoholic, but two years ago, a small
    quantity of albumen being found in the urine, he was persuaded to
    leave off alcohol, and has since been a teetotaller. Though
    ordinarily very reticent about sexual matters, he began four or
    five years ago to commit acts of exhibitionism, exposing himself
    to servants in the house and occasionally to women in the
    country. This continued after the alcohol had been abandoned and
    lasted for several years, though the attention of the police was
    never attracted to the matter, and so far as possible he was
    quietly supervised by his friends. Nine months after, the acts of
    exhibitionism ceased, apparently in a spontaneous manner, and
    there has so far been no relapse.

Exhibitionism is an act which, on the face of it, seems nonsensical and
meaningless, and as such, as an inexplicable act of madness, it has
frequently been treated both by writers on insanity and on sexual
perversion. "These acts are so lacking in common sense and intelligent
reflection that no other reason than insanity can be offered for the
patient," Ball concluded.[55] Moll, also, who defines exhibitionism
somewhat too narrowly as a condition in which "the charm of the exhibition
lies for the subject in the display itself," not sufficiently taking into
consideration the imagined effect on the spectator, concludes that "the
psychological basis of exhibitionism is at present by no means cleared
up."[56]

We may probably best approach exhibitionism by regarding it as
fundamentally a symbolic act based on a perversion of courtship. The
exhibitionist displays the organ of sex to a feminine witness, and in the
shock of modest sexual shame by which she reacts to that spectacle, he
finds a gratifying similitude of the normal emotions of coitus.[57] He
feels that he has effected a psychic defloration.

    Exhibitionism is thus analogous, and, indeed, related, to the
    impulse felt by many persons to perform indecorous acts or tell
    indecent stories before young and innocent persons of the
    opposite sex. This is a kind of psychic exhibitionism, the
    gratification it causes lying exactly, as in physical
    exhibitionism, in the emotional confusion which it is felt to
    arouse. The two kinds of exhibitionism may be combined in the
    same person: Thus, in a case reported by Hoche (p. 97), the
    exhibitionist an intellectual and highly educated man, with a
    doctor's degree, also found pleasure in sending indecent poems
    and pictures to women, whom, however, he made no attempt to
    seduce; he was content with the thought of the emotions he
    aroused or believed that he aroused.

    It is possible that within this group should come the agent in
    the following incident which was lately observed by a lady, a
    friend of my own. An elderly man in an overcoat was seen standing
    outside a large and well-known draper's shop in the outskirts of
    London; when able to attract the attention of any of the
    shop-girls or of any girl in the street he would fling back his
    coat and reveal that he was wearing over his own clothes a
    woman's chemise (or possibly bodice) and a woman's drawers; there
    was no exposure. The only intelligible explanation of this action
    would seem to be that pleasure was experienced in the mild shock
    of interested surprise and injured modesty which this vision was
    imagined to cause to a young girl. It would thus be a
    comparatively innocent form of psychic defloration.

It is of interest to point out that the sexual symbolism of active
flagellation is very closely analogous to this symbolism of exhibitionism.
The flagellant approaches a woman with the rod (itself a symbol of the
penis and in some countries bearing names which are also applied to that
organ) and inflicts on an intimate part of her body the signs of blushing
and the spasmodic movements which are associated with sexual excitement,
while at the same time she feels, or the flagellant imagines that she
feels, the corresponding emotions of delicious shame.[58] This is an even
closer mimicry of the sexual act than the exhibitionist attains, for the
latter fails to secure the consent of the woman nor does he enjoy any
intimate contact with her naked body. The difference is connected with the
fact that the active flagellant is usually a more virile and normal person
than the exhibitionist. In the majority of cases the exhibitionist's
sexual impulse is very feeble, and as a rule he is either to some degree a
degenerate, or else a person who is suffering from an early stage of
general paralysis, dementia, or some other highly enfeebling cause of
mental disorganization, such as chronic alcoholism. Sexual feebleness is
further indicated by the fact that the individuals selected as witnesses
are frequently mere children.

    It seems probable that a form of erotic symbolism somewhat
    similar to exhibitionism is to be found in the rare cases in
    which sexual gratification is derived from throwing ink, acid or
    other defiling liquids on women's dresses. Thoinot has recorded a
    case of this kind (_Attentats aux Moeurs_, 1898, pp. 484, _et
    seq._). An instructive case has been presented by Moll. In this
    case a young man of somewhat neuropathic heredity had as a youth
    of 16 or 17, when romping with his young sister's playfellows,
    experienced sexual sensations on chancing to see their white
    underlinen. From that time white underlinen and white dresses
    became to him a fetich and he was only attracted to women so
    attired. One day, at the age of 25, when crossing the street in
    wet weather with a young lady in a white dress, a passing vehicle
    splashed the dress with mud. This incident caused him strong
    sexual excitement, and from that time he had the impulse to throw
    ink, perchloride of iron, etc., on to ladies' white dresses, and
    sometimes to cut and tear them, sexual excitement and ejaculation
    taking place every time he effected this. (Moll, "Gutachten ueber
    einem Sexual Perversen [Besudelungstrieb]," _Zeitschrift fuer
    Medizinalbeamte_, Heft XIII, 1900). Such a case is of
    considerable psychological interest. Thoinot considers that in
    these cases the fleck is a fetich. That is an incorrect account
    of the matter. In this case the white garments constituted the
    primary fetich, but that fetich becomes more acutely realized,
    and at the same time both parties are thrown into an emotional
    state which to the fetichist becomes a mimicry of coitus, by the
    act of defilement. We may perhaps connect with this phenomenon
    the attraction which muddy shoes often exert over the
    shoe-fetichist, and the curious way in which, as we have seen (p.
    18), Restif de la Bretonne associates his love of neatness in
    women with his attraction to the feet, the part, he remarks,
    least easy to keep clean.

    Garnier applied the term _sadi-fetichism_ to active flagellation
    and many similar manifestations such as we are here concerned
    with, on the grounds that they are hybrids which combine the
    morbid adoration for a definite object with the impulse to
    exercise a more or less degree of violence. From the standpoint
    of the conception of erotic symbolism I have adopted there is no
    need for this term. There is here no hybrid combination of two
    unlike mental states. We are simply concerned with states of
    erotic symbolism, more or less complete, more or less complex.

The conception of exhibitionism as a process of erotic symbolism, involves
a conscious or unconscious attitude of attention in the exhibitionist's
mind to the psychic reaction of the woman toward whom his display is
directed. He seeks to cause an emotion which, probably in most cases, he
desires should be pleasurable. But from one cause or another his finer
sensibilities are always inhibited or in abeyance, and he is unable to
estimate accurately either the impression he is likely to produce or the
general results of his action, or else he is moved by a strong impulsive
obsession which overpowers his judgment. In many cases he has good reason
for believing that his act will be pleasurable, and frequently he finds
complacent witnesses among the low-class servant girls, etc.

    It may be pointed out here that we are quite justified in
    speaking of a penis-fetichism and also of a vulva-fetichism. This
    might be questioned. We are obviously justified in recognizing a
    fetichism which attaches itself to the pubic hair, or, as in a
    case with which I am acquainted, to the clitoris, but it may seem
    that we cannot regard the central sexual organs as symbols of
    sex, symbols, as it were, of themselves. Properly regarded,
    however, it is the sexual act rather than the sexual organ which
    is craved in normal sexual desire; the organ is regarded merely
    as the means and not as the end. Regarded as a means the organ is
    indeed an object of desire, but it only becomes a fetich when it
    arrests and fixes the attention. An attention thus pleasurably
    fixed, a vulva-fetichism or a penis-fetichism, is within the
    normal range of sexual emotion (this point has been mentioned in
    the previous volume when discussing the part played by the
    primary sexual organs in sexual selection), and in coarse-grained
    natures of either sex it is a normal allurement in its
    generalized shape, apart from any attraction to the person to
    whom the organs belong. In some morbid cases, however, this
    penis-fetichism may become a fully developed sexual perversion. A
    typical case of this kind has been recorded by Howard in the
    United States. Mrs. W., aged 39, was married at 20 to a strong,
    healthy man, but derived no pleasure from coitus, though she
    received great pleasure from masturbation practiced immediately
    after coitus, and nine years after marriage she ceased actual
    coitus, compelling her husband to adopt mutual masturbation. She
    would introduce men into the house at all times of the day or
    night, and after persuading them to expose their persons would
    retire to her room to masturbate. The same man never aroused
    desire more than once. This desire became so violent and
    persistent that she would seek out men in all sorts of public
    places and, having induced them to expose themselves, rapidly
    retreat to the nearest convenient spot for self-gratification.
    She once abstracted a pair of trousers she had seen a man wear
    and after fondling them experienced the orgasm. Her husband
    finally left her, after vainly attempting to have her confined in
    an asylum. She was often arrested for her actions, but through
    the intervention of friends set free again. She was a highly
    intelligent woman, and apart from this perversion entirely
    normal. (W.L. Howard, "Sexual Perversion," _Alienist and
    Neurologist_, January, 1896.) It is on the existence of a more or
    less developed penis-fetichism of this kind that the
    exhibitionist, mostly by an ignorant instinct, relies for the
    effects he desires to produce.

The exhibitionist is not usually content to produce a mere titillated
amusement; he seeks to produce a more powerful effect which must be
emotional whether or not it is pleasurable. A professional man in
Strassburg (in a case reported by Hoche[59]) would walk about in the
evening in a long cloak, and when he met ladies would suddenly throw his
cloak back under a street lamp, or igniting a red-fire match, and thus
exhibit his organs. There was an evident effort--on the part of a weak,
vain, and effeminate man--to produce a maximum of emotional effect. The
attempt to heighten the emotional shock is also seen in the fact that the
exhibitionist frequently chooses a church as the scene of his exploits,
not during service, for he always avoids a concourse of people, but
perhaps toward evening when there are only a few kneeling women scattered
through the edifice. The church is chosen, often instinctively rather than
deliberately, from no impulse to commit a sacrilegious outrage--which, as
a rule, the exhibitionist does not feel his act to be--but because it
really presents the conditions most favorable to the act and the effects
desired. The exhibitionist's attitude of mind is well illustrated by one
of Garnier's patients who declared that he never wished to be seen by more
than two women at once, "just what is necessary," he added, "for an
exchange of impressions." After each exhibition he would ask himself
anxiously: "Did they see me? What are they thinking? What do they say to
each other about me? Oh! how I should like to know!" Another patient of
Garnier's, who haunted churches for this purpose, made this very
significant statement: "Why do I like going to churches? I can scarcely
say. _But I know that it is only there that my act has its full
importance_. The woman is in a devout frame of mind, and she must see that
such an act in such a place is not a joke in bad taste or a disgusting
obscenity; _that if I go there it is not to amuse myself; it is more
serious than that!_ I watch the effect produced on the faces of the ladies
to whom I show my organs. I wish to see them express a profound joy. I
wish, in fact, that they may be forced to say to themselves: _How
impressive Nature is when thus seen!_"

    Here we trace the presence of a feeling which recalls the
    phenomena of the ancient and world-wide phallic worship, still
    liable to reappear sporadically. Women sometimes took part in
    these rites, and the osculation of the male sexual organ or its
    emblematic representation by women is easily traceable in the
    phallic rites of India and many other lands, not excluding Europe
    even in comparatively recent times. (Dulaure in his _Divinites
    Generatices_ brings together much bearing on these points; cf.:
    Ploss and Bartels, _Das Weib_, vol. i, Chapter XVII, and Bloch,
    _Beitraege zur Psychopathia Sexualis_, Teil I, pp. 115-117. Colin
    Scott has some interesting remarks on phallic worship and the
    part it has played in aiding human evolution, "Sex and Art,"
    _American Journal of Psychology_, vol. vii, No. 2, pp. 191-197.
    Irving Rosse describes some modern phallic rites in which both
    men and women took part, similar to those practiced in vaudouism,
    "Sexual Hypochondriasis," _Virginia Medical Monthly_, October,
    1892.)

    Putting aside any question of phallic worship, a certain pride
    and more or less private feeling of ostentation in the new
    expansion and development of the organs of virility seems to be
    almost normal at adolescence. "We have much reason to assume,"
    Stanley Hall remarks, "that in a state of nature there is a
    certain instinctive pride and ostentation that accompanies the
    new local development. I think it will be found that
    exhibitionists are usually those who have excessive growth here,
    and that much that modern society stigmatizes as obscene is at
    bottom more or less spontaneous and perhaps in some cases not
    abnormal. Dr. Seerley tells me he has never examined a young man
    largely developed who had the usual strong instinctive tendency
    of modesty to cover himself with his hands, but he finds this
    instinct general with those whose development is less than the
    average." (G. Stanley Hall, _Adolescence_, vol. ii, p. 97.) This
    instinct of ostentation, however, so far as it is normal, is held
    in check by other considerations, and is not, in the strict
    sense, exhibitionism. I have observed a full-grown telegraph boy
    walking across Hampstead Heath with his sexual organs exposed,
    but immediately he realized that he was seen he concealed them.
    The solemnity of exhibitionism at this age finds expression in
    the climax of the sonnet, "Oraison du Soir," written at 16 by
    Rimbaud, whose verse generally is a splendid and insolent
    manifestation of rank  adolescence:--

        "Doux comme le Seigneur du cedre et des hysopes,
        Je pisse vers les cieux bruns tres haut et tres loin,
        Avec l'assentiment des grands heliotropes."

        (J.A. Rimbaud, _Oeuvres_, p. 68.)

    In women, also, there would appear to be traceable a somewhat
    similar ostentation, though in them it is complicated and largely
    inhibited by modesty, and at the same time diffused over the body
    owing to the absence of external sexual organs. "Primitive
    woman," remarks Madame Renooz, "proud of her womanhood, for a
    long time defended her nakedness which ancient art has always
    represented. And in the actual life of the young girl to-day
    there is a moment when by a secret atavism she feels the pride of
    her sex, the intuition of her moral superiority, and cannot
    understand why she must hide its cause. At this moment, wavering
    between the laws of Nature and social conventions, she scarcely
    knows if nakedness should or should not affright her. A sort of
    confused atavistic memory recalls to her a period before clothing
    was known, and reveals to her as a paradisaical ideal the customs
    of that human epoch." (Celine Renooz, _Psychologie Comparee de
    l'Homme et de la Femme_, p. 85.) It may be added that among
    primitive peoples, and even among some remote European
    populations to-day, the exhibition of feminine nudity has
    sometimes been regarded as a spectacle with religious or magic
    operation. (Ploss, _Das Weib_, seventh edition, vol. ii, pp.
    663-680; Havelock Ellis, _Man and Woman_, fourth edition, p.
    304.) It is stated by Gopcevic that in the long struggle between
    the Albanians and the Montenegrians the women of the former
    people would stand in the front rank and expose themselves by
    raising their skirts, believing that they would thus insure
    victory. As, however, they were shot down, and as, moreover,
    victory usually fell to the Montenegrians, this custom became
    discredited. (Quoted by Bloch, _Op. cit._, Teil II, p. 307.)

    With regard to the association, suggested by Stanley Hall,
    between exhibitionism and an unusual degree of development of the
    sexual organs, it must be remarked that both extremes--a very
    large and a very small penis--are specially common in
    exhibitionists. The prevalence of the small organ is due to an
    association of exhibitionism with sexual feebleness. The
    prevalence of the large organ may be due to the cause suggested
    by Hall. Among Mahommedans the sexual organs are sometimes
    habitually exposed by religious penitents, and I note that
    Bernhard Stern, in his book on the medical and sexual aspects of
    life in Turkey, referring to a penitent of this sort whom he saw
    on the Stamboul bridge at Constantinople, remarks that the organ
    was very largely developed. It may well be in such a case that
    the penitent's religious attitude is reinforced by some lingering
    relic of a more fleshly ostentation.

It is by a pseudo-atavism that this phallicism is evoked in the
exhibitionist. There is no true emergence of an ancestrally inherited
instinct, but by the paralysis or inhibition of the finer and higher
feelings current in civilization, the exhibitionist is placed on the same
mental level as the man of a more primitive age, and he thus presents the
basis on which the impulses belonging to a higher culture may naturally
take root and develop.

    Reference may here be made to a form of primitive exhibitionism,
    almost confined to women, which, although certainly symbolic, is
    absolutely non-sexual, and must not, therefore, be confused with
    the phenomena we are here occupied with. I refer to the
    exhibition of the buttocks as a mark of contempt. In its most
    primitive form, no doubt, this exhibitionism is a kind of
    exorcism, a method of putting evil spirits, primarily, and
    secondarily evil-disposed persons, to flight. It is the most
    effective way for a woman to display sexual centers, and it
    shares in the magical virtues which all unveiling of the sexual
    centers is believed by primitive peoples to possess. It is
    recorded that the women of some peoples in the Balkan peninsula
    formerly used this gesture against enemies in battle. In the
    sixteenth century so distinguished a theologian as Luther when
    assailed by the Evil One at night was able to put the adversary
    to flight by protruding his uncovered buttocks from the bed. But
    the spiritual significance of this attitude is lost with the
    decay of primitive beliefs. It survives, but merely as a gesture
    of insult. The symbolism comes to have reference to the nates as
    the excretory focus, the seat of the anus. In any case it ignores
    any sexual attractiveness in this part of the body. Exhibitionism
    of this kind, therefore, can scarcely arise in persons of any
    sensitiveness or aesthetic perception, even putting aside the
    question of modesty, and there seems to be little trace of it in
    classic antiquity when the nates were regarded as objects of
    beauty. Among the Egyptians, however, we gather from Herodotus
    (Bk. II, Chapter LX) that at a certain popular religious festival
    men and women would go in boats on the Nile, singing and playing,
    and when they approached a town the women on the boats would
    insult the women of the town by injurious language and by
    exposing themselves. Among the Arabs, however, the specific
    gesture we are concerned with is noted, and a man to whom
    vengeance is forbidden would express his feelings by exposing his
    posterior and strewing earth on his head (Wellhausen, _Rests
    Arabischen Heidentums_, 1897, p. 195). It is in Europe and in
    mediaeval and later times that this emphatic gesture seems to have
    flourished as a violent method of expressing contempt. It was by
    no means confined to the lower classes, and Kleinpaul, in
    discussing this form of "speech without words," quotes examples
    of various noble persons, even princesses, who are recorded thus
    to have expressed their feelings. (Kleinpaul, _Sprache ohne
    Worte_, pp. 271-273.) In more recent times the gesture has become
    merely a rare and extreme expression of unrestrained feeling in
    coarse-grained peasants. Zola, in the figure of Mouquette in
    _Germinal_, may be said to have given a kind of classic
    expression to the gesture. In the more remote parts of Europe it
    appears to be still not altogether uncommon. This seems to be
    notably the case among the South Slavs, and Krauss states that
    "when a South Slav woman wishes to express her deepest contempt
    for anyone she bends forward, with left hand raising her skirts,
    and with the right slapping her posterior, at the same time
    exclaiming: 'This for you!'" (Kryptadia, vol. vi, p. 200.)

    A verbal survival of this gesture, consisting in the contemptuous
    invitation to kiss this region, still exists among us in remote
    parts of the country, especially as an insult offered by an angry
    woman who forgets herself. It is said to be commonly used in
    Wales. ("Welsh AEdoelogy," Kryptadia, vol. ii, pp. 358, et seq.)
    In Cornwall, when addressed by a woman to a man it is sometimes
    regarded as a deadly insult, even if the woman is young and
    attractive, and may cause a life-long enmity between related
    families. From this point of view the nates are a symbol of
    contempt, and any sexual significance is excluded. (The
    distinction is brought out by Diderot in _Le Neveu de Rameau:_
    "_Lui:_--Il y a d'autres jours ou il ne m'en couterait rien pour
    etre vil tant qu'on voudrait; ces jours-la, pour un liard, je
    baiserais le cul a la petite Hus. _Moi:_--Eh! mais, l'ami, elle
    est blanche, jolie, douce, potelee, et c'est un acte d'humilite
    auquel un plus delicat que vous pourrait quelquefois s'abaisser.
    _Lui:_--Entendons-nous; c'est qu'il y a baiser le cul au simple,
    et baiser le cul au figure.")

    It must be added that a sexual form of exhibitionism of the nates
    must still be recognized. It occurs in masochism and expresses
    the desire for passive flagellation. Rousseau, whose emotional
    life was profoundly affected by the castigations which as a child
    he received from Mlle Lambercier, has in his _Confessions_ told
    us how, when a youth, he would sometimes expose himself in this
    way in the presence of young women. Such masochistic
    exhibitionism seems, however, to be rare.

While the manifestations of exhibitionism are substantially the same in
all cases, there are many degrees and varieties of the condition. We may
find among exhibitionists, as Garnier remarks, dementia, states of
unconsciousness, epilepsy, general paralysis, alcoholism, but the most
typical cases, he adds, if not indeed the cases to which the term properly
belongs, are those in which it is an impulsive obsession. Krafft-Ebing[60]
divides exhibitionists into four clinical groups: (1) acquired states of
mental weakness, with cerebral or spinal disease clouding consciousness
and at the same time causing impotence; (2) epileptics, in whom the act is
an abnormal organic impulse performed in a state of imperfect
consciousness; (3) a somewhat allied group of neurasthenic cases; (4)
periodical impulsive cases with deep hereditary taint. This classification
is not altogether satisfactory. Garnier's classification, placing the
group of obsessional cases in the foreground and leaving the other more
vaguely defined groups in the background, is probably better. I am
inclined to consider that most of the cases fall into one or other of two
mixed groups. The first class includes cases in which there is more or
less congenital abnormality, but otherwise a fair or even complete degree
of mental integrity; they are usually young adults, they are more or less
precisely conscious of the end they wish to attain, and it is often only
with a severe struggle that they yield to their impulses. In the second
class the beginnings of mental or nervous disease have diminished the
sensibility of the higher centers; the subjects are usually old men whose
lives have been absolutely correct; they are often only vaguely aware of
the nature of the satisfaction they are seeking, and frequently no
struggle precedes the manifestation; such was the case of the overworked
clergyman described by Hughes,[61] who, after much study, became morose
and absent-minded, and committed acts of exhibitionism which he could not
explain but made no attempt to deny; with rest and restorative treatment
his health improved and the acts ceased. It is in the first class of cases
alone that there is a developed sexual perversion. In the cases of the
second class there is a more or less definite sexual intention, but it is
only just conscious, and the emergence of the impulse is due not to its
strength but to the weakness, temporary or permanent, of the higher
inhibiting centers.

Epileptic cases, with loss of consciousness during the act, can only be
regarded as presenting a pseudo-exhibitionism. They should be excluded
altogether. It is undoubtedly true that many cases of real or apparent
exhibitionism occur in epileptics.[62] We must not, however, too hastily
conclude that because these acts occur in epileptics they are necessarily
unconscious acts. Epilepsy frequently occurs on a basis of hereditary
degeneration, and the exhibitionism may be, and not infrequently is, a
stigma of the degeneracy and not an indication of the occurrence of a
minor epileptic fit. When the act of pseudo-exhibitionism is truly
epileptic, it will usually have no psychic sexual content, and it will
certainly be liable to occur under all sorts of circumstances, when the
patient is alone or in a miscellaneous concourse of people. It will be on
a level with the acts of the highly respectable young woman who, at the
conclusion of an attack of _petit mal_, consisting chiefly of a sudden
desire to pass urine, on one occasion lifted up her clothes and urinated
at a public entertainment, so that it was with difficulty her friends
prevented her from being handed over to the police.[63] Such an act is
automatic, unconscious, and involuntary; the spectators are not even
perceived; it cannot be an act of exhibitionism. Whenever, on the other
hand, the place and the time are evidently chosen deliberately,--a quiet
spot, the presence of only one or two young women or children,--it is
difficult to admit that we are in the presence of a fit of epileptic
unconsciousness, even when the subject is known to be epileptic.

Even, however, when we exclude those epileptic pseudo-exhibitionists who,
from the legal point of view, are clearly irresponsible, it must still be
remembered that in every case of exhibitionism there is a high degree of
either mental abnormality on a neuropathic basis, or else of actual
disease. This is true to a greater extent in exhibitionism than in almost
any other form of sexual perversion. No subject of exhibitionism should be
sent to prison without expert medical examination.


FOOTNOTES:

[54] Lasege first drew attention to this sexual perversion and gave it its
generally accepted name, "Les Exhibitionistes," _L'Union Medicale_, May,
1877. Magnan, on various occasions (for example, "Les Exhibitionistes,"
_Archives de l'Anthropologie Criminelle_, vol. v, 1890, p. 456), has given
further development and precision to the clinical picture of the
exhibitionist.

[55] B. Ball. _La Folie Erotique_, p. 86.

[56] Moll, _Untersuchungen ueber die Libido Sexualis_, bd. i, p. 661.

[57] "Exhibitionism in its most typical form is," Garnier truly says, "a
_systematic act_, manifesting itself as the _strange equivalent of a
sexual connection_, or its _substitution_." The brief account of
exhibitionism (pp. 433-437) in Garnier's discussion of "Perversions
Sexuelles" at the International Medical Congress at Paris in 1900
(_Section de Psychiatrie: Comptes-Rendus_) is the most satisfactory
statement of the psychological aspects of this perversion with which I am
acquainted. Garnier's unrivalled clinical knowledge of these
manifestations, due to his position during many years as physician at the
Depot of the Prefecture of Police in Paris, adds great weight to his
conclusions.

[58] The symbolism of coitus involved in flagellation has been touched on
by Eulenburg (_Sexuale Neuropathie_, p. 121), and is more fully developed
by Duehren (_Geschlechtsleben in England_, bd. ii, pp. 366, _et seq._).

[59] A. Hoche, _Neurologische Centralblatt_, 1896, No. 2.

[60] _Op. cit._, pp. 478, et seq.

[61] C.H. Hughes, "Morbid Exhibitionism," _Alienist and Neurologist_,
August, 1904. Another somewhat similar American case, also preceded by
overwork, and eventually adjudged insane by the courts, is recorded by
D.S. Booth, _Alienist and Neurologist_, February, 1905.

[62] Exhibitionism in epilepsy is briefly discussed by Fere, _L'Instinct
Sexuel_, second edition, pp. 194-195.

[63] W.S. Colman, "Post-Epileptic Unconscious Automatic Actions,"
_Lancet_, July 5, 1890.


