
CHAPTER IX

DEFINITIONS OF PSYCHOLOGY


Let us resume the study of the preceding ideas in another form. Since,
moreover, to define mind is at the same time to define psychology, let
us seek for the truth which we can glean from the definitions of this
science. Our object is not to discover an exact definition, but to
make use of those already existing.

To define psychology is to describe the features of the domain over
which this science holds sway, and at the same time to indicate the
boundaries which separate it from its neighbours. At first sight this
is an affair of geometric survey, presenting no kind of difficulty;
for psychology does not merge by insensible transitions into the
neighbouring sciences, as physics does with chemistry, for example, or
chemistry with biology.

To all the sciences of external nature psychology offers the violent
opposition of the moral to the physical world. It cannot be put in
line with the physical sciences. It occupies, on the contrary, a
position apart. It is the starting point, the most abstract and simple
of the moral sciences; and it bears the same relation to them that
mechanics does to the physical.

All this is doubtless true; and yet a very great difficulty has been
experienced in condensing into a clear definition the essence of
psychology. This is proved by the multiplicity of definitions
attempted. They are so many because none of them has proved completely
satisfactory. Their abundance shows their insufficiency. I will try to
introduce a little order into these attempts, and propose to
distribute the definitions of psychology into the following
categories:--

     1. The definition by substance; the metaphysical definition
          _par excellence_.

     2. The definition by enumeration.

     3.  "      "         method.

     4.  "      "         degree of certainty.

     5.  "      "         content.

     6.  "      "         point of view.

     7.  "      "         the peculiar nature of mental laws.

We will rapidly run through this series of efforts at definition, and
shall criticise and reject nearly the whole of them; for the last
alone seems exact--that is to say, in harmony with the ideas laid down
above.

Metaphysical definition has to-day taken a slightly archaistic turn.
Psychology used to be considered as the _science of the soul_. This
is quite abandoned. Modern authors have adopted the expression and
also the idea of Lange,[33] who was, I think, the first to declare
that we ought to cultivate a _soulless psychology_. This categorical
declaration caused an uproar, and a few ill-informed persons
interpreted it to mean that the new psychology which has spread in
France under cover of the name of Ribot, sought to deny the existence
of the soul, and was calculated to incline towards materialism. This
is an error.

It is very possible, indeed, that several adepts of the new or
experimental psychology may be materialists from inward conviction.
The exclusive cultivation of external facts, of phenomena termed
material, evidently tends--this is a mystery to none--to incline the
mind towards the metaphysical doctrine of materialism. But, after
making this avowal, it is right to add at once that psychology, as a
science of facts, is the vassal of no metaphysical doctrine. It is
neither spiritualist, materialist, nor monist, but a science of facts
solely. Ribot and his pupils have proclaimed this aloud at every
opportunity. Consequently it must be recognised that the rather
amphibological expression "soulless psychology" implies no negation of
the existence of the soul. It is--and this is quite a different
thing--rather an attitude of reserve in regard to this problem. We do
not solve this problem; we put it on one side.

And, certainly, we are right to do so. The soul, viewed as a
substance--that is, as a something distinct from psychical phenomena,
which, while being their cause and support, yet remains inaccessible
to our direct means of cognition--is only an hypothesis, and it cannot
serve as objective to a science of facts. This would imply a
contradiction in terms.

Unfortunately; we must confess that if it be right to relegate to
metaphysics the discussion on the concept of the soul, it does not
really suffice to purge our minds of all metaphysics; and a person who
believes himself to be a simple and strict experimentalist is often a
metaphysician without knowing it. These excommunications of
metaphysics also seem rather childish at the present day. There is
less risk than some years ago in declaring that: "Here metaphysics
commence and positive science ends, and I will go no further." There
is even a tendency in modern psychologists to interest themselves in
the highest philosophical problems, and to take up a certain position
with regard to them.

The second kind of definition is, we have said, that by enumeration.
It consists in placing before the eyes of the reader an assortment of
psychological phenomena and then saying: "These are the things
psychology studies." One will take readily as samples the ideas,
reasonings, emotions, and other manifestations of mental life. If this
is only a strictly provisional definition, a simple introduction to
the subject, we accept it literally. It may serve to give us a first
impression of things, and to refresh the memories of those who, by a
rather extraordinary chance, would not doubt that psychology studies
our thoughts. But whatever may be the number of these deeply ignorant
persons, they constitute, I think, a negligible quantity; and, after
these preliminaries, we must come to a real definition and not juggle
with the problem, which consists in indicating in what the spiritual
is distinguished from the material. Let us leave on one side,
therefore, the definitions by enumeration.

Now comes the definition by method. Numbers of authors have supposed
that it is by its method that psychology is distinguished from the
other sciences.

To the mind is attached the idea of the within, to nature the idea of
being without the mind, of constituting a "without" (_un dehors_). It
is a vague idea, but becomes precise in a good many metaphors, and has
given rise to several forms of speech. Since the days of Locke, we
have always spoken of the internal life of the mind as contrasted
with the external life, of subjective reality as contrasted with
objective reality; and in the same way we oppose the external senses
to the inner sense (the internal perception), which it has at times
been proposed to erect into a sixth sense. Though no longer quite the
Cartesian dualism, this is still a dualism.

It has also been said that psychology is the science of introspection,
and, in addition, that scientific psychology is a controlled
introspection. This science of the "internal facts of man" would thus
be distinguished from the other natural sciences which are formed by
the use of our outer senses, by external observation--that is to say,
to use a neologism, by externospection. This verbal symmetry may
satisfy for a moment minds given to words, but on reflection it is
perceived that the distinction between introspection and
externospection does not correspond to a fundamental and constant
difference in the nature of things or in the processes of cognition. I
acknowledge it with some regret, and thus place myself in
contradiction with myself; for I for a long time believed, and have
even said in print, that psychology is the science of introspection.
My error arose from my having made too many analyses of detail, and
not having mounted to a sufficiently wide-reaching conception.

The definition I have given of consciousness is the implied
condemnation of the above ideas. Consciousness, being nothing but an
act of revelation, has neither a within nor a without; it does not
correspond to a special domain which would be an inner one with regard
to another domain.

Every consideration on the position of things is borrowed from the
sphere of the object, and remains foreign to the sphere of the
consciousness. It is by an abuse of language that we speak of the
outer world in relation to the world of consciousness, and it is pure
imagination on the part of philosophers to have supposed that our
sensations are first perceived as internal states and states of
consciousness, and are subsequently projected without to form the
outer world. The notion of internal and external is only understood
for certain objects which we compare by position to certain others.

In fact, we find that the opposition between an external and an
internal series is generally founded on two characteristics: sensation
is considered external in relation to the idea, and an object of
cognition is considered as internal when it is accessible only to
ourselves. When these two characteristics are isolated from each
other, one may have doubts; but when they co-exist, then the
outwardness or inwardness appears fully evidenced. We see then that
this distinction has nothing to do with the value of consciousness,
and has nothing mental about it.

It is thus that our ideas are judged from internal events. It is our
microcosm opposed to the macrocosm. It is the individual opposed to
the social. Looking at an external object, we remain in communion with
our fellows, for we receive, or think we receive, identical
sensations. At all events, we receive corresponding sensations. On the
other hand, my thought is mine, and is known to me alone; it is my
sanctuary, my private closet, where others do not enter. Every one can
see what I see, but no one knows what I think.

But this difference in the accessibility of phenomena is not due to
their peculiar nature. It is connected with a different fact, with the
modes of excitement which call them forth. If the visual sensation is
common to all, it is because the exciting cause of the sensation is an
object external to our nervous systems, and acting at a distance on
all.[34] The tactile sensation is at the beginning more personal to
the one who experiences it, since it requires contact; and the lower
sensations are in this intimacy still in progress. And then, the same
object can give rise, in common-place circumstances, to a sensation
either common to all beings or special to one alone. The capsule of
antipyrine which I swallow is, before my doing so, visible to all
eyes; once in my mouth, I am the only one to perceive it. It is
therefore possible that the same sensation, according to the
displacements of the object which excites it, may make part of the
internal or of the external series; and as all psychic life is
sensation, even effort, and, as we are assured, emotion, it follows
that our argument extends to all the psychical elements.

Finally, the internal or external character of events, which might be
called their geographical position, is a characteristic which has no
influence upon the method destined to take cognisance of it. The
method remains one. Introspection does not represent a source of
cognition distinct from externospection, for the same faculties of the
mind--reason, attention, and reflection--act on sensation, the source
of the so-called external sciences, and on the idea, the source of the
so-called inner science. A fact can be studied by essentially the same
process, whether regarded by the eyes or depicted by the memory. The
consciousness changes its object and orientation, not its nature. It
is as if, with the same opera-glass, we looked in turn at the wall of
the room and through the window.

I can even quote on this point a significant fact: there are observers
who are organised in such a way that they especially observe by
memory. Placed before the sensorial phenomenon which strikes their
senses, they are sometimes amazed, as if hypnotised; they require to
get away from it to regain consciousness of themselves, to analyse the
fact, and to master it, and it is by means of the memory that they
study it, on condition, of course, of afterwards coming back to verify
their conclusions by a fresh observation from nature. Will it be said
that the physicist, the chemist, or the biologist who follows this
slow method, and who thus observes retroactively, practises physics
and biology by introspection? Evidently this would be ridiculous.

Conversely, introspection may, in certain cases, adopt the procedure
of externospection. No doubt it would be inexact to say that the
perception of one of our ideas always takes place through the same
mechanism as the perception of one of our sensations. To give an
account of what we think does not imply the same work as in the case
of what we see; for, generally, our thoughts and our images do not
appear to us spontaneously. They are first sought for by us, and are
only realised after having been wished for. We go from the vague to
the precise, from the confused to the clear; the direction of thought
precedes, then, its realisation in images; and the latter, being
expected, is necessarily comprehended when it is formed. But we may
come across curious circumstances in which it is the image which has
precedence over its appearance, and in that case it is exact to say
that this uninvoked image must be interpreted and recognised as if it
were an external object. In cases of this kind, there passes through
our mind something which surprises us. I see, by internal vision, a
face with a red nose, and I have to search my memory for a long time,
even for days, in order to give precision to the vague feeling that I
have seen it before, so as to finally say with confidence, "It is So
and So!" Or else I hear in my inner ear a certain voice, with a
metallic tone and authoritative inflections: this voice pronounces
scientific phrases, gives a series of lectures, but I know not to whom
it belongs, and it costs me a long effort to reach the interpretation:
it is the voice of M. Dastre! There is, then, a certain space of time,
more or less long, in which we can correctly assert that we are not
aware of what we are thinking; we are in the presence of a thought in
the same state of uncertainty as in that of an external, unknown, and
novel object. The labour of classification and of interpretation cast
upon us is of the same order; and, when this labour is effected
incorrectly, it may end in an illusion. Therefore illusions of
thought are quite as possible as illusions of the senses, though rarer
for the reasons above stated. But the question of frequency has no
theoretical importance.

I have shown elsewhere, by experiments on hysterics, that it is
possible by the intermediary of their insensibility to touch to
suggest ideas on the value of which the patients make mistakes. For
instance, you take the finger in which they have no sensation, you
touch it, you bend it. The patient, not seeing what is done, does not
feel it, but the tactile sensation unfelt by their principal
consciousness somehow awakes the visual image of the finger; this
enters into the field of consciousness, and most often is not
recognised by the subject, who describes the occurrence in his own
way; he claims, for instance, that he thinks of sticks or of columns.
In reality he does not know of what he is thinking, and we know better
than he. He is thinking of his finger, and does not recognise it.

All these examples show that the clearly defined characteristics into
which it is sought to divide extrospection and introspection do not
exist. There is, however, a reason for preserving the distinction,
because it presents a real interest for the psychology of the
individual. These two words introspection and extrospection admirably
convey the difference in the manner of thinking between those who
from preference look, and those who from preference reflect. On the
one hand, the observers, who are often men of action; on the other,
the speculators, who are often mystics. But it would be no more
legitimate by this means to separate psychology and physics than to
say, for instance, "There are two kinds of geology: one is the geology
of France, for one is acquainted with it without going from home, and
the other is that of the rest of the world, because in order to know
it one must cross the frontier."

We reject, therefore, the definition drawn from the difference of
method. At bottom there is no difference of method, but only
differences of process, of _technique_. The method is always the same,
for it is derived from the application of a certain number of laws to
the objects of cognition, and these laws remain the same in all
spheres of application.

Here is another difference of method which, if it were true, would
have an incalculable importance. Psychology, we are told, is a science
of direct and immediate experiment; it studies facts as they present
themselves to our consciousness, while the natural sciences are
sciences of indirect and mediate experiment, for they are compelled to
interpret the facts of consciousness and draw from them conclusions on
nature. It has also been said, in a more ambitious formula, "The
science of physical objects is relative; logical science is absolute."

Let us examine this by the rapid analysis of any perception taken at
haphazard. What I perceive directly, immediately, we are told, is not
the object, it is my state of consciousness; the object is inferred;
concluded, and taken cognisance of through the intermediary of my
state of consciousness. We only know it, says Lotze, _circa rem_. It
is therefore apprehended less immediately, and every natural science
employs a more roundabout method than that of psychology. This last,
by studying states of consciousness, which alone are known to us
directly, comprehends reality itself, absolute reality. "There is more
absolute reality," M. Rabier boldly says, "in the simple feeling that
a man, or even an animal, has of its pain when beaten than in all the
theories of physics, for, beyond these theories, it can be asked, what
are the things that exist. But it is an absurdity to ask one's self
if, beyond the pain of which one is conscious, there be not another
pain different from that one."[35]

Let us excuse in psychologists this petty and common whim for
exaggerating the merit of the science they pursue. But here the limit
is really passed, and no scholar will admit that the perception and
representation of a body, as it may take place in the brain of a
Berthelot, can present any inferiority as a cognition of the absolute,
to the pain felt by the snail I crush under my foot. Nobody except
metaphysicians will acknowledge that psychology is a more precise and
certain science than physics or chemistry.

The criterion furnished by the development of the respective sciences
would prove just the contrary. The observations of psychology are
always rather unprecise. Psychological phenomena, notwithstanding the
efforts of Fechner and his school, are not yet measured with the same
strictness and ease as the tangible reality. To speak plainly, the
psychologist who vaunts the superiority of his method, and only shows
inferior results, places himself in a somewhat ridiculous and
contradictory position; he deserves to be compared to those
spiritualists who claim the power of evoking the souls of the
illustrious dead and only get from them platitudes.

In the main the arguments of the metaphysicians given above appear to
me to contain a grave error. This consists in supposing that the
natural sciences study the reality hidden beneath sensation, and only
make use of this fact as of a sign which enables them to get back from
effect to cause. This is quite inexact. That the natural sciences are
limited by sensation is true; but they do not go outside it, they
effect their constructions with sensation alone. And the reason is
very simple: it is the only thing they know. To the metaphysical
psychologist, who claims sensation as his own property, saying, "But
this sensation is a state of my consciousness, it is mine, it is
myself," the physicist has the right to answer: "I beg your pardon!
this sensation is the external object that I am studying; it is my
column of mercury, my spring, my precipitate, my amoeba; I
comprehend these objects directly, and I want no other." Psychology
finds itself, therefore, exactly on the same footing as the other
sciences in the degree in which it studies sensations that it
considers as its own property. I have already said that the sensations
proper to psychology are hardly represented otherwise than by the
emotional sensations produced by the storms in the apparatus of
organic life.

We now come to the definitions by content. They have been numerous,
but we shall only quote a few. The most usual consists in saying, that
_Psychology studies the facts of consciousness_. This formula passes,
in general, as satisfactory. The little objection raised against it
is, that it excludes the unconscious facts which play so important a
part in explaining the totality of mental life; but it only requires
some usual phrase to repair this omission. One might add, for
instance, to the above formula: conscious facts and those which,
while unconscious under certain conditions, are yet conscious in
others.

This is not, however, the main difficulty, which is far more serious.
On close examination, it is seen that the term, _fact of
consciousness_, is very elastic, and that for a reason easy to state.
This is, that all facts which exist and are revealed to us reach us by
the testimony of the consciousness, and are, consequently, facts of
consciousness. If I look at a locomotive, and analyse its machinery, I
act like a mechanic; if I study under the microscope the structure of
infusoria, I practise biology; and yet the sight of the locomotive,
the perception of the infusoria, are just facts of consciousness, and
should belong to psychology, if one takes literally the above
definition, which is so absolute that it absorbs the entire world into
the science of the mind. It might, indeed, be remarked that certain
phenomena would remain strictly psychological, such as, for instance,
the emotions, the study of which would not be disputed by any physical
science; for the world of nature offers us nothing comparable to an
emotion or an effort of will, while, on the other hand, everything
which is the object of physical science--that is, everything which can
be perceived by our external senses--may be claimed by psychology.
Therefore, it is very evident the above definition is much too wide,
and does not agree with _solo definito_. It does not succeed in
disengaging the essential characteristic of physics. This
characteristic indeed exists, and we foresee it, but we do not
formulate it.

Another definition by content has not been much more happy. To
separate the material from the moral, the conception of Descartes was
remembered, and we were told that: "Psychology is the science of what
exists only in time, while physics is the science of what exists at
once in time and in space."

To this theoretical reasoning it might already be objected that, in
fact, and in the life we lead, we never cease to localise in space,
though somewhat vaguely, our thought, our Ego, and our intellectual
whole. At this moment I am considering myself, and taking myself as an
example. I am writing these lines in my study, and no metaphysical
argument can cause me to abandon my firm conviction that my
intellectual whole is in this room, on the second floor of my house at
Meudon. I am here, and not elsewhere. My body is here; and my soul, if
I have one, is here. I am where my body is; I believe even that I am
within my body.

This localisation, which certainly has not the exactness nor even the
characteristics of the localisation of a material body in space, seems
to me to result from the very great importance we attach, to the
existence of our body in perception and in movement. Our body
accompanies all our perceptions; its changes of position cause these
perceptions to vary; the accidents which happen to it bring us
pleasure or pain. Some of its movements are under our orders; we
observe that others are the consequences of our thoughts and our
emotions. It occupies, therefore, among the objects of cognition a
privileged place, which renders it more intimate and more dear to us
than other objects. There is no need to inquire here whether, in
absolute reality, I am lodged within it, for this "I" is an artificial
product manufactured from memories. I have before explained what is
the value of the relation subject-object. It is indisputable that in
the manufacture of the subject we bring in the body. This is too
important an element for it not to have the right to form part of the
synthesis; it is really its nucleus. As, on the other hand, all the
other elements of the synthesis are psychical, invisible, and reduced
to being faculties and powers, it may be convenient to consider them
as occupying the centre of the body or of the brain. There is no need
to discuss this synthesis, for it is one of pure convenience. As well
inquire whether the personality of a public company is really
localised at its registered offices, round the green baize cover
which adorns the table in the boardroom.

Another definition of psychology, which is at once a definition by
content and a definition by method, has often been employed by
philosophers and physiologists. It consists in supposing that there
really exist two ways of arriving at the cognition of objects: the
within and the without. These two ways are as opposed to each other as
the right and wrong side of a stuff. It is in this sense that
psychology is the science of the within and looks at the wrong side of
the stuff, while the natural sciences look at the right side. And it
is so true, they add, that the same phenomenon appears under two
radically different forms according as we look at it from the one or
the other point of view. Thus, it is pointed out to us, every one of
our thoughts is in correlation with a particular state of our cerebral
matter; our thought is the subjective and mental face; the
corresponding cerebral process is the objective and material face.

Then the difference between representation, which is a purely
psychological phenomenon, and a cerebral state which is a material
one, and reducible to movement, is insisted upon; and it is declared
that these two orders of phenomena are separated by irreducible
differences.

Lastly, to take account of the meaning of these differences, and to
explain them, it is pointed out that they are probably connected with
the modes of cognition which intervene to comprehend the mental and
the physical. The mental phenomenon, we are told, is comprehended by
itself, and as it is; it is known without any mystery, and in its
absolute reality. The physical phenomenon, on the contrary, only
reaches us through the intermediary of our nerves, more or less
transformed in consequence by the handling in transport. It is an
indirect cognition which causes us to comprehend matter; we have of
this last only a relative and apparent notion, which sufficiently
explains how it may differ from a phenomenon of thought.

I have already had occasion to speak of this dualism, when we were
endeavouring to define sensation. We return to its criticism once
more, for it is a conception which in these days has become classic;
and it is only by repeatedly attacking it that it will be possible to
demonstrate its error.

To take an example: I look at the plain before me, and see a flock of
sheep pass over it. At the same time an observer is by my side and is
not looking at the same thing as myself. It is not at the plain that
he looks; it is, I will suppose, within my brain. Armed with a
microscope _a la_ Jules Verne, he succeeds in seeing what is passing
beneath my skull, and he notices within my fibres and nerve cells
those phenomena of undulation which physiologists have hitherto
described hypothetically. This observer notices then, that, while I am
looking over the plain, my optic nerve conveys a certain kind of
movements--these are, I suppose, displacements of molecules which
execute a complicated kind of dance. The movement follows the course
of the optic nerve, traverses the chiasma, goes along the fascia,
passes the internal capsule, and finally arrives at the visual centres
of the occipital region. Here, then, are the two terms of comparison
constituted: on the one hand, we have a certain representation--that
is, my own; and on the other hand, coinciding with this representation
we have the dynamic changes in the nerve centres. These are the two
things constituting the right and wrong side of the stuff. We shall be
told: "See how little similarity there is here! A representation is a
physical fact, a movement of molecules a material fact." And further,
"If these two facts are so little like each other, it is because they
reach us by two different routes."

I think both these affirmations equally disputable. Let us begin with
the second. Where does one see that we possess two different sources
of knowledge? Or that we can consider an object under two different
aspects? Where are our duplicate organs of the senses, of which the
one is turned inward and the other outward? In the example chosen for
this discussion, I have supposed two persons, each of whom
experiences a visual perception. One looks at one object, the other at
another; but both are looking with the same organs of sense, that is,
with their eyes. How is it possible to understand that these eyes can,
in turn, according to the necessity of the moment, see the two faces,
physical and mental, of the same object?

They are the two faces of an identical object, is the answer made to
us, because the two visions, although applied to the same object, are
essentially different. On the one hand is a sensation of displacement,
of movement, of a dance executed by the molecules of some proteid
substance; on the other hand is a flock of sheep passing over the
plain at a distance of a hundred metres away.

It seems to me that here also the argument advanced is not sound. In
the first place, it is essential to notice that not only are the two
paths of cognition identical, but also that the perceptions are of the
same nature. There is in this no opposition between the physical and
the mental. What is compared are the two phenomena, which are both
mixed and are physico-mental--physical, through the object to which
they are applied, mental, through the act of cognition they imply. To
perceive an object in the plain and to perceive a dynamic state of the
brain are two operations which each imply an act of cognition; and,
in addition, the object of this knowledge is as material in the one as
in the other case. A flock of sheep is matter just as much as my
brain.

No doubt, here are objects which differ; my observer and myself have
not the same perception. I acknowledge, but do not wonder at it. How
could our two perceptions be similar? I look at the sheep, and he at
the interior of my brain. It is not astonishing that, looking at such
different objects, we should receive images also different. Or, again,
if this other way of putting it be preferred, I would say: the
individual A looks at the flock through the intermediary of his
nervous system, while B looks at it through that of two nervous
systems, put as it were end to end (though not entirely), his own
nervous system first, and then that of A. How, then, could they
experience the same sensation?

They could only have an identical sensation if the idea of the
ancients were to be upheld, who understood the external perception of
bodies to result from particles detaching themselves from their
bodies, and after a more or less lengthy flight, striking and entering
into our organs of sense.[36]

Let us imagine, just for a moment, one of our nerves--the optic
nerve, for instance--transformed into a hollow tube, along which the
emissions of miniatures should wend their way. In this case,
evidently, if so strange a disposition were to be realised, and if B
could see what was flowing in the optic nerve of A, he would
experience a sensation almost analogous to that of A. Whenever the
latter saw a dog, a sheep, or a shepherd, B would likewise see in the
optic canal minute dogs, microscopic sheep, and Lilliputian shepherds.
At the cost of such a childish conception, a parity of content in the
sensations of our two spectators A and B might be supposed. But I will
not dwell on this.

The above considerations seem to me to explain the difference
generally noticed between thought and the physiological process. It is
not a difference of nature, an opposition of two essences, or of two
worlds--it is simply a difference of object; just that which separates
my visual perception of a tree and my visual perception of a dog.
There remains to know in what manner we understand the relation of
these two processes: this is another problem which we will examine
later.

Since the content does not give us the differentiation we desire, we
will abandon the definitions of psychology by content. What now
remains? The definitions from the point of view. The same fact may he
looked at, like a landscape, from different points of view, and
appears different with the changes therein. It is so with the facts we
consider psychical, and the autonomy of psychology would thus be a
matter of point of view.

It has, then, been supposed--and this is a very important
proposition--that the distinctive feature of psychical facts does not
consist in their forming a class of particular events. On the
contrary, their characteristic is to be studied in their dependency on
the persons who bring them about. This interesting affirmation is not
new: it may be read in the works of Mach, Kuelpe, Muensterberg, and,
especially, of Ebbinghaus, from whom I quote the following lines of
quite remarkable clearness: "Psychology is not distinguished from
sciences like physics and biology, which are generally and rightly
opposed to it, by a different content, in the way that, for instance,
zoology is distinguished from mineralogy or astronomy. It has the same
content, but considers it from a different point of view and with a
different object. It is the science, not of a given part of the world,
but of the whole world, considered, however, in a certain relation. It
studies, in the world, those formations, processes, and relations, the
properties of which are essentially determined by the properties and
functions of an organism, of an organised individual.... Psychology,
in short, considers the world from an individual and subjective point
of view, while the science of physics studies it as if it were
independent of us."

Over these definitions by point of view, one might quibble a little;
for those who thus define psychology are not always consistent with
themselves. In other passages of their writings they do not fail to
oppose psychical to physiological phenomena, and they proclaim the
irreducible heterogeneity of these two orders of phenomena and the
impossibility of seeing in physics the producing cause of the moral.
Ebbinghaus is certainly one of the modern writers who have most
strongly insisted on this idea of opposition between the physiological
and the psychical, and he is a convinced dualist. Now I do not very
clearly understand in what the principle of heterogeneity can consist
to a mind which admits, on the other hand, that psychology does not
differ from the physical sciences by its content.

However, I confine myself here to criticising the consequences and not
the starting point. The definition of the psychical phenomenon by the
point of view seems to me correct, although it has more concision than
clearness; for it rests especially upon a material metaphor, and the
expression "point of view" hardly applies except to the changes of
perspective furnished by visible objects.

It would be more exact to say that psychology specially studies
certain objects of cognition, such as those which have the character
of representations (reminiscences, ideas, concepts), the emotions, the
volitions, and the reciprocal influences of these objects among
themselves. It studies, then, a part of the material world, of that
world which till now has been called psychological, because it does
not come under the senses, and because it is subjective and
inaccessible to others than ourselves; it studies the laws of those
objects, which laws have been termed mental.[37]

These laws are not recognised, popularly speaking, either in physics
or in biology; they constitute for us a cognition apart from that of
the natural world. Association by resemblance, for example, is a law
of consciousness; it is a psychological law which has no application
nor counterpart in the world of physics or biology. We may therefore
sum up what has been said by the statement that psychology is the
study of a certain number of laws, relations, and connections.

As to the particular feature which distinguishes mental from physical
laws, we can formulate it, as does William James, by saying that the
essence of a mental law is to be teleological, or, if the phrase be
preferred, we can say that mental activity is a finalistic activity,
which expends itself as will in the pursuit of future ends, and as
intelligence in the choice of the means deemed capable of serving
those ends. An act of intelligence is recognised by the fact of its
aiming at an end, and employing for this end one means chosen out of
many. Finality and intelligence are thus synonymous. In opposition to
mental law, physical law is mechanical, by which expression is simply
implied the absence of finality. Finality opposed to mechanism; such
is the most concise and truest expression in which must be sought the
distinctive attribute of psychology and of the moral sciences, the
essential characteristic by which psychological are separated from
physical facts.

I think it may be useful to dwell a little on the mental laws which I
have just opposed to the physical, and whose object is to assure
preadaptation and form a finality.[38] Their importance cannot be
exaggerated. Thanks to his power of preadaptation, the being endowed
with intelligence acquires an enormous advantage over everything which
does not reason. No doubt, as has been shrewdly remarked, natural
selection resembles a finality, for it ends in an adaptation of beings
to their surroundings. There is therefore, strictly speaking, such a
thing as finality without intelligence. But the adaptation resulting
therefrom is a crude one, and proceeds by the elimination of all that
does not succeed in adapting itself; it is a butchery. Real finalism
saves many deaths, many sufferings, and many abortions.[39]

Let us examine, then, the process of preadaptation; it will enable us
to thoroughly comprehend, not only the difference between the physical
and the psychical laws, but the reason why the psychical manages in
some fashion to mould itself upon the physical law.

Now, the means employed by preadaptation is, if we take the matter in
its simplest form, to be aware of sensations before they are
experienced. If we reflect that all prevision implies a previous
knowledge of the probable trend of events, it will be understood that
the part played by intelligence consists in becoming imbued with the
laws of nature, for the purpose of imitating its workings. By the
laws of nature, we understand here only that order of real sensations,
the knowledge of which is sufficient to fulfil the wants of practical
life. To us there are always gaps in this order, because the sensation
it is important for us to know is separated from us either by the
barriers of time or of space, or by the complication of useless
sensations. Thence the necessity of interpolations. That which we do
not perceive directly by our senses, we are obliged to represent to
ourselves by our intelligence; the image does the work of sensation,
and supplements the halting sensation in everything which concerns
adaptation.

To replace the inaccessible sensation by the corresponding image, is
therefore to create in ourselves a representation of the outer world
which is, on all the points most useful to us, more complete than the
direct and sensorial presentation of the moment. There is in us a
power of creation, and this power exercises itself in the imitation of
the work of nature; it imitates its order, it reconstitutes on the
small scale adapted to our minds, the great external order of events.
Now, this work of imitation is only really possible if the imitator
has some means at his disposal analogous to those of the model.

Our minds could not divine the designs of nature, if the laws of
images had nothing in common with the laws of nature. We are thus led
to confront these two orders of laws with each other; but, before
doing so, one more preliminary word is necessary. We have up till now
somewhat limited the problem, in order to understand it. We have
reduced the psychological being to one single function, the
intellectual, and to one single object of research, the truth. This
is, however, an error which has often been committed, which is now
known and catalogued, called intellectualism, or the abuse of
intellectualism. It is committed for this very simple reason, that it
is the intellectual part of our being which best allows itself to be
understood, and, so to speak, intellectualised. But this leaves out of
the question a part of our entire mental being so important and so
eminent, that if this part be suppressed, the intelligence would cease
to work and would have no more utility than a machine without motive
power. Our own motive power is the will, the feeling, or the tendency.
Will is perhaps the most characteristic psychical function, since, as
I have already had occasion to say, nothing analogous to it is met
with in the world of nature. Let us therefore not separate the will
from the intelligence, let us incarnate them one in the other; and,
instead of representing the function of the mind as having for its aim
knowledge, foresight, the combination of means, and self-adaptation,
we shall be much nearer the truth in representing to ourselves a
being who _wills_ to know, _wills_ to foresee, and _wills_ to adapt
himself, for, after all, he _wills_ to live.

Having said this, let us compare the psychological law and that of
nature. Are they identical? We shall be told that they are not, since,
as a fact, errors are committed at every moment by the sudden failures
of human reason. This is the first idea which arises. Human error, it
would seem, is the best proof that the two laws in question are not
alike, and we will readily add that a falling stone does not mistake
its way, that the crystal, in the course of formation does not miss
taking the crystalline shape, because they form part of physical
nature, and are subject in consequence to its determinism. But this is
faulty reasoning, and a moment of reflection demonstrates it in the
clearest possible manner; for adaptation may miss its aim without the
being who adapts himself and his surroundings necessarily obeying
different laws. When the heat of a too early spring causes buds to
burst forth prematurely which are afterwards destroyed by frost, there
is produced a fault of adjustment which resembles an error of
adaptation, and the bringing forward of this error does not
necessarily imply that the tree and the whole of physical nature are
obeying different laws. Moreover, the difference between the laws of
nature and those of the understanding does not need deduction by
reasoning from an abstract principle; it is better to say that it is
directly observable, and this is how I find that it presents itself to
us.

The essential law of nature is relatively easy to formulate, as it is
comprised in the very definition of law. It simply consists in the
sentence: uniformity under similar conditions. We might also say: a
constant relation between two or several phenomena, which can also be
expressed in a more abstract way by declaring that the law of nature
rests on the combination of two notions, identity and constancy.

On the other hand, the laws of our psychical activity partly
correspond to the same tendencies, and it would be easy to demonstrate
that the microcosm of our thoughts is governed by laws which are also
an expression of these two combined notions of constancy and identity.
It is, above all, in the working of the intellectual machine, the best
known and the most clearly analysed up till now, that we see the
application of this mental law which resembles, as we say, on certain
sides, the physical law: and the best we can do for our demonstration
will doubtless be to dissect our reasoning powers. Reason, a process
essential to thought in action, is developed in accordance with a law
which resembles in the most curious manner a physical law. It
resembles it enough to imitate it, to conform to it, and, so to speak,
to mould itself on it.

Now, the reason does not follow the caprices of thought, it is subject
to rules; it results from the properties of the images, those
properties which we have above referred to, the material character of
which we have recognised, and which are two in number--similarity and
contiguity, as they are termed in the jargon of the schools. They are
properties which have for their aim to bring things together, to
unite, and to synthetise. They are unceasingly at work, and so
apparent in their labour that they have long been known. We know,
since the time of Aristotle, that two facts perceived at the same time
reproduce themselves together in the memory--this is the law of
contiguity; and that two facts perceived separately, but which are
similar, are brought together in our mind--this is the law of
similarity.

Now, similarity and contiguity form by combination the essential part
of all kinds of reasoning, and this reasoning, thus understood, works
in a fashion which much resembles (we shall see exactly in what
degree) a physical law. I wish to show this in a few words. What
renders my demonstration difficult and perhaps obscure is, that we
shall be obliged to bring together rather unexpectedly categories of
phenomena which are generally considered separate.

The distinctive attribute of the reason consists, as I have said, in
the setting to work of these two elementary properties, similarity and
contiguity. It consists, in fact, in extending continuity by
similarity; in endowing with identical properties and similar
accompaniments things which resemble each other; in other words, it
consists in impliedly asserting that the moment two things are
identical in one point they are so for all the rest. This will be
fairly well understood by imagining what takes place when mental
images having the above-mentioned properties meet. Suppose that B is
associated with C, and that A resembles B. In consequence of their
resemblance the passing from A to B is easy; and then B suggesting C
by contiguity, it happens that this C is connected with A connected,
though, in reality, they have never been tried together. I say they
are associated on the basis of their relation to B, which is the
rallying point. It is thus that, on seeing a piece of red-hot iron
(A), I conclude it is hot (C), because I recollect distinctly or
unconsciously another piece of red-hot iron (B), of which I once
experienced the heat. It is this recollection B which logicians, in
their analysis of logical, verbal, and formal argument, call the
middle term. Our representation of the process of reasoning is not
special to argument. It also expresses the process of invention, and
every kind of progress from the known to the unknown. It is an
activity which creates relations, which assembles and binds together,
and the connections made between different representations are due to
their partial identities, which act as solder to two pieces of metal.

It will now be understood that these relations between the images
curiously resemble the external order of things, the order of our
sensations, the order of nature, the physical law. This is because
this physical law also has the same character and expresses itself
similarly. We might say "all things which resemble each other have the
same properties," or "all things alike on one point resemble each
other on all other points." But immediately we do so, the difference
between the physical and the mental law becomes apparent. The formula
we have given is only true on condition that many restrictions and
distinctions are made.

The process of nature is so to do that the _same_ phenomenon always
unfolds itself in the same order. But this process is not always
comprehended in real life, for it is hidden from our eyes by the
manifold combinations of chance; in the reality that we perceive there
is a crowd of phenomena which resemble each other but are not really
the same. There are a number of phenomena which co-exist or follow
each other without this order of co-existence or succession being
necessary or constant. In other words, there are resemblances which
are the marks of something, as a logician would say, and others which
are not the marks of anything; there are relations of time and space
which are the expression of a law; there are some which are
accidental, and may possibly never be reproduced.

It would be a wonderful advantage if every scientific specialist would
make out a list of the non-significant properties that he recognises
in matter. The chemist, for example, would show us that specific
weight has hardly any value in diagnosis, that the crystalline form of
a salt is often not its own, that its colour especially is almost
negligible because an immense number of crystals are white or
colourless, that precipitation by a given substance does not
ordinarily suffice to characterise a body, and so on. The botanist, on
his part, would show us that, in determining plants, absolute
dimension is less important than proportion, colour less important
than form, certain structures of organs less important than others.
The pathologist would teach us that most pathological symptoms have
but a trivial value; the cries, the enervation, the agitation of a
patient, even the delirium which so affects the bystanders, are less
characteristic of fever than the rate of his pulse, and the latter
less than the temperature of the armpit or the dryness of the tongue,
&c. At every moment the study of science reveals resemblances of facts
and contiguities of facts which must be neglected for the sake of
others. And if we pass from this profound knowledge of the objects to
the empirical knowledge, to the external perception of bodies, it is
in immense number that one espies around one traps laid by nature. The
sound we hear resembles several others, all produced by different
causes; many of our visual sensations likewise lend themselves to the
most varied interpretations; by the side of the efficient cause of an
event we find a thousand entangled contingencies which appear so
important that to disentangle them we are as much perplexed as the
savage, who, unable to discriminate between causes and coincidences,
returns to drink at the well which has cured him, carefully keeping to
the same hour, the same gestures, and the same finery.

The reason of this is that the faculty of similarity and the faculty
of contiguity do not give the distinction, necessary as it is, between
resemblances and co-existences which are significant and those which
are not. The causal nexus between two phenomena is not perceived as
something apart and _sui generis_; it is not even perceived at all. We
perceive only their relation in time and space, and it is our mind
which raises a succession to the height of a causal connection, by
intercalating between cause and effect something of what we ourselves
feel when we voluntarily order the execution of a movement. This is
not the place to inquire what are the experimental conditions in which
we subject phenomena to this anthropomorphic transformation; it will
suffice for us to repeat here that, in perception, a chance relation
between phenomena impresses us in the same way as when it is the
expression of a law.

Our intellectual machine sometimes works in accord with the external
law and at others makes mistakes and goes the wrong way. Then we are
obliged to correct it, and to try a better adjustment, either by
profounder experimenting with nature (methods of concordance,
discordance, variations, &c.), or by a comparison of different
judgments and arguments made into a synthesis; and this collaboration
of several concordant activities ends in a conclusion which can never
represent the truth, but only the probable truth. The study of the
laws of the mind shows us too clearly, in fact, their fluidity with
regard to the laws of nature for us not to accept probabilism. There
exists no certitude--only very varied degrees of probability. Daily
practice contents itself with a very low degree of probability;
judicial logic demands a rather higher one, especially when it is a
question of depriving one of our fellow-creatures of liberty or life.
Science claims one higher still. But there is never anything but
differences of degrees in probability and conjecture.

This, then, is the definition of psychology that we propose. It
studies a certain number of laws which we term mental, in opposition
to those of external nature, from which they differ, but which,
properly speaking, do not deserve the qualification of mental, since
they are--or at least the best known of them are--laws of the images,
and the images are material elements. Although it may seem absolutely
paradoxical, psychology is a science of matter--the science of a part
of matter which has the property of preadaptation.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 33: LANGE, _Histoire du Materialisme_, II., 2me. partie,
chap. iii.]

[Footnote 34: Let us remark, in passing, how badly nature has
organised the system of communication between thinking beings. In what
we experience we have nothing in common with our fellows; each one
experiences his own sensations and not those of others. The only
meeting point of different minds is found in the inaccessible domain
of the _noumena._]

[Footnote 35: E. RABIER, _Lecons de Philosophie_, "Psychologie," p.
33.]

[Footnote 36: This seems to have been the opinion of Democritus. The
modern doctrine of radiation from the human body, if established,
would go nearly as far as the supposition in the text. Up till now,
however, it lacks confirmation.--ED.]

[Footnote 37: I am compelled, much against my will, to use throughout
this passage an equivocal expression, that of "mental law," or law of
consciousness, or psychological law. I indicate by this the laws of
contiguity and of similarity; as they result from the properties of
the images, and as these are of a material nature, they are really
physical and material laws like those of external nature. But how can
all these laws be called physical laws without running the risk of
confusing them one with the other?]

[Footnote 38: _Finality_ seems to be here used in the sense of the
doctrine which regards perfection as the final cause of
existence.--ED.]

[Footnote 39: See a very interesting article by E. GOBLOT, "La
Finalite sans Intelligence," _Revue de Metaphysique_, July 1900.]




BOOK III

THE UNION OF THE SOUL[40] AND THE BODY



