
CHAPTER III

MATERIALISM AND PARALLELISM


Materialism is a very ancient doctrine. It is even the most ancient of
all, which simply proves that amongst the different explanations given
of our double physico-mental nature, this doctrine is the easiest to
understand. The origin of materialism is to be found in the beliefs of
savage tribes, and is again found, very clearly defined, in the
philosophy of those ancient Greeks who philosophized before Plato and
Aristotle. A still stranger fact is that the thoughts of a great
number of the Fathers of the Church inclined towards the philosophy of
matter. Then, in the course of its evolution, there occurred a moment
of eclipse, and materialism ceased to attract attention till the
contemporary period in which we assist at its re-birth, Nowadays, it
constitutes a powerful doctrine, the more so that it has
surreptitiously crept into the thoughts of many learned men without
their being clearly conscious of it. There are many physicists and
physiologists who think and speak as materialists, though they have
made up their minds to remain on the battle-ground of observed facts
and have a holy horror of metaphysics. In a certain sense, it may be
said that materialism is the metaphysics of those who refuse to be
metaphysicians.

It is very evident that in the course of its long history, materialism
has often changed its skin. Like all knowledge, it has been subject to
the law of progress; and, certainly, it would not have been of a
nature to satisfy the intellectual wants of contemporary scholars, had
it not stripped itself of the rude form under which it first
manifested itself in the mind of primitive man. Yet what has enabled
the doctrine to keep its unity through all its changes is that it
manifests a deeply human tendency to cling by preference to everything
visible and tangible.

Whatever strikes the eyes, or can be felt by the hand, seems to us in
the highest degree endowed with reality or existence. It is only much
later, after an effort of refined thought, that we come to recognise
an existence in everything that can be perceived in any way whatever,
even in an idea. It is still later that we understand that existence
is not only that which is perceived but also that which is linked
logically with the rest of our knowledge. A good deal of progress has
been necessary to reach this point.

As I have not the slightest intention of giving even an abridged
history of materialism, let us come at once to the present day, and
endeavour to say in what consists the scientific form this doctrine
has assumed. Its fundamental basis has not changed. It still rests on
our tendency to give chief importance to what can be seen and touched;
and it is an effect of the hegemony of three of our senses, the
visual, the tactile, and the muscular.

The extraordinary development of the physical sciences has no doubt
given an enormous encouragement to materialism, and it may be said
that in the philosophy of nature it occupies a principal place, and
that it is there in its own domain and unassailable.

It has become the expression of the idea that everything that can be
explained scientifically, everything susceptible of being measured, is
a material phenomenon. It is the representation of the material
explanation pushed to its last limits, and all experiments, all
calculations, all inductions resting on the grand principle of the
conservation of matter and energy plead in its favour.

We will examine with some precision how far such a doctrine solves the
problem of the existence of the intellectual functions.

The doctrine has understood this connection as being purely material,
and has sought its image in other phenomena which are entirely so.
Thus, it has borrowed from physiology the principle of its
explanation, it has transported into the domain of thought the idea of
function, and it has supposed that the soul is to the body in the
relation of function to organ. Intelligence would thus be a cerebral
function. To explain intelligence, materialists link it with matter,
turn it into a property of matter, and compare it to a movement of
matter, and sometimes even to a secretion. So Karl Vogt, the
illustrious Genevan naturalist, one day declared, to the great scandal
of every one, that the brain secretes the thought as the kidney does
urine. This bold comparison seemed shocking, puerile, and false, for a
secretion is a material thing while thought is not. Karl Vogt also
employed another comparison: the brain produces the thought as the
muscle produces movement, and it at once seems less offensive to
compare the thought to a movement than to compare it to a liquid
secretion. At the present day, an illustration still more vague would
be used, such as that of a transformation of energy: chemical energy
disengaged by the nerve centres would be thus looked upon as
transformed into psychical energy.

However, it matters little what metaphors are applied to for help in
explaining the passage from the physical to the mental. What
characterises materialist philosophy is its belief in the possibility
of such a passage, and its considering it as the genesis of thought.
"One calls materialist," says Renouvier, with great exactness, "every
philosophy which defines thought as the product of a compound whose
elements do not imply thought." A sweeping formula which allows us to
foresee all the future avatars of the materialist doctrine, and to
class them beforehand in the same category.

The criticisms which have been directed against materialism are all,
or nearly all, variations of the principle of heterogeneity. We will
not dwell long on this, but simply recollect that, according to this
principle, it is impossible to attribute to the brain the capacity of
generating consciousness. Physical force can indeed generate physical
force under the same or a different form, and it thus produces all the
effects which are determined by the laws of nature. But it is
impossible to comprehend how physical force can enrich itself at a
given moment by a conscious force. Physical force is reduced to
movements of bodies and to displacements of atoms; how could a change
of position in any inert objects give rise to a judgment, a reasoning,
or any phenomenon of the consciousness? It is further said: this idea
of function, which materialists here introduce to render more
comprehensible the passage from a material body to a spiritual action,
contains only an empty explanation, for the function is not
essentially distinct by its nature from the organ; it is simply "the
organ in activity," it adds to the organ taken in a state of repose
but one change, viz. activity, that is to say movement, and,
consequently, the function of an organ is material by the same right
as the organ. When a muscle contracts, this contraction, which is the
proper function of the muscular fibre, consists in a condensation of
the muscular protoplasm, and this condensation is a material fact.
When a gland enters into activity, a certain quantity of liquid flows
into the channels of the gland, and this liquid is caused by a
physical and chemical modification of the cellular protoplasm; it is a
melting, or a liquefaction, which likewise is material. The function
of the nerve cell is to produce movement, or to preserve it, or to
direct it; ii is material like the cells. There is therefore nothing
in all those functional phenomena which might lead us to understand
how a material cause should be capable of engendering a conscious
effect.

It seems that all materialists have acknowledged that here is the
vulnerable point in their theory, for it is the principle of
heterogeneity which they have especially combated. But their defence
is wanting in frankness, and principally consists in subterfuges.

In brief, it affirms that we are surrounded with mystery, that we are
not sufficiently learned to have the right to impose limits to the
power of matter, and to say to it: "Thou shalt not produce this
phenomenon." A materialist theologian declares that he sees no
impossibility in stones thinking and arguing, if God, in His infinite
power, has decided to unite thought with brute matter. This argument
is not really serious; it demands the intervention of so powerful a
_Deus ex machina_, that it can be applied equally to all problems; to
solve all is to solve none.

Modern materialists rightly do not bring God into the question. Their
mode of argument takes another form; but it remains to be seen if, at
bottom, it is not the same as the other. It simply consists in
affirming that up till now we know certain properties of matter only,
but that science every day discovers new ones; that matter is a
reservoir of unknown forces, and that it is not impossible that the
origin of psychical forces may yet be discovered in matter. This idea
is clearly hinted at by Littre. The physicist Tyndall gave it a
definite formula when he uttered at the Belfast Congress this phrase
so often quoted: "If I look back on the limits of experimental
science, I can discern in the bosom of that matter (which, in our
ignorance, while at the same time professing our respect for its
Creator, we have, till now, treated with opprobrium) the promise and
the power of all forms and qualities of life."

The opponents of the doctrine have not ceased to answer that the
matter of to-morrow, like the matter of to-day, can generate none but
material effects, and that a difficulty is not solved by putting off
its solution to some indefinite date in our scientific evolution: and
it certainly seems that the counter-stroke is decisive, if we admit
the principle of heterogeneity with its natural consequence.

We will now criticise the above doctrine by making use of the ideas I
have above enunciated. The criticism we have to apply to materialism
is not the same as that just summarised. The axis of the discussion
changes its position.

In the first place, I reproach materialism with presenting itself as a
theory of the generation of the consciousness by the object. We have
already reproached idealism with putting itself forward as a theory of
the generation of the object by the consciousness. The error of the
two systems is produced in a converse direction, but is of the same
gravity. The consciousness and its object, we say yet again,
constitute the widest division it is possible to effect in the domain
of cognition; it is quite as illegitimate to reduce the first term to
the second as to reduce the second to the first. To reduce one to the
other, by way of affiliation or otherwise, there must first be
discovered, then, an identity of nature which does not exist.

In the second place, when one examines closely the explanation
materialism has imagined in order to derive thought from an action of
matter, it is seen that this representation is rendered completely
impossible by all we know of the nature of thought. For the
materialist to suppose for one moment that thought is a cerebral
function, he must evidently make an illusion for himself as to what
thought is, and must juggle with concepts. Perhaps, could we penetrate
into his own inmost thought, we should discover that at the moment he
supposes a mere cell can manufacture the phenomena of consciousness,
some vague image suggests itself to him whereby he identifies these
phenomena with a light and subtle principle escaping from the nerve
cell, something which resembles an electric _effluve_, or a
will-of-the-wisp, or the flame from a punch-bowl.[46]

I cannot, of course, tell whether my supposition is correct. But what
I assert, with the calmness of perfect certitude, is that the
materialist has not taken the pains to analyse attentively what he
calls the phenomenon of consciousness. Had he made this analysis and
kept the elements in his mind, he would have seen that it is almost
impossible to hook in any way a phenomenon of consciousness on to a
material molecule.

In fact, also, to take this into account, we will not remain within
the vagueness of the concept, but will take a particular example to
argue upon, viz. that of an external perception. I open my window on a
fine day, and I see before me a sunny plain, with, as far as the eye
can reach, houses amongst the trees, and again more houses, the most
distant of which are outlined against my far-off horizon. This is my
mental phenomenon. And while I am at my window, my eyes fixed on the
view, the anatomist declares that, starting from my retina, molecular
vibrations travel along the optic nerve, cross each other at the
chiasma, enter into the fascia, pass through the internal capsule and
reach the hemispheres, or rather the occipital regions, of the brain,
where, for the moment, we agree to localise the centre of projection
of the visual sensations. This is my physical phenomenon. It now
becomes the question of passing from this physical phenomena to the
mental one. And here we are stopped by a really formidable
difficulty.

My mental phenomenon is not entirely mental, as is usually supposed
from the deceitful brevity of the phrase. It is in great part
physical, for it can be decomposed into two elements, a consciousness
and its object; and this object of the consciousness, this group of
little houses I see in the plain, belongs to sensation--that is to
say, to something physical--or, in other words, to matter.

Let us examine in its turn the physical process which is supposed to
be discovered in my nervous centres while I am in course of
contemplating the landscape. This pretended physical process itself,
quite as much as my conscious perception of the landscape, is a
physico-psychical phenomenon; for my cerebral movements are perceived,
hypothetically at least, by an observer. This is a perception,
consequently it can be decomposed into two things, a consciousness and
its object. As a further consequence, when we wish, by a metaphysical
effort, to attach the consciousness to a material state of the brain
and to establish a link between the two events, it will be found that
we wrongly hook one physico-mental phenomenon on to another.

But, evidently, this objection is not a refutation. We may if we
choose suppose that the so-called cerebral process is capable of
subsisting at moments when no one perceives it, and that it exists of
itself, is sufficient for itself, and is entirely physical. But can
we subject the mental process of perception to the same purification?
Can we separate these two elements, the consciousness and its object,
retain the element consciousness and reject the element object, which
is physical, thus constituting a phenomenon entirely mental, which
might then be possibly placed beside the entirely physical phenomenon,
so as to study their relation to each other? This is quite impossible,
and the impossibility is double, for it exists _de facto_ and _de
jure_.

_De jure_, because we have already established that a consciousness
empty and without object cannot be conceived. _De facto_, because the
existence of the object that consciousness carries with it is very
embarrassing for the materialist; for this object is material, and as
real and material as the fibres and cells of the brain. It might,
indeed, be supposed that by transformation or otherwise there goes
forth from the cerebral convolution a purely psychical phenomenon
resembling a wave. But how can we conceive the transformation of this
convolution into a semi-material phenomenon? How can we comprehend
that there should issue from this convolution the material object of a
perception--for example, a plain dotted with houses?

An English histologist remarked one day, with some eloquence, how
little the most minute study of the brain aided us to understand
thought. He was thus answering Auguste Comte, who, in a moment of
aberration, claimed that psychology, in order to become a science,
ought to reject the testimony of the consciousness, and to use
exclusively as its means of study the histology of the nerve centres
and the measurement of the cranium. Our histologist, who had passed
part of his life examining, under the microscope, fragments of
cerebral matter, in following the forms of the cells, the course of
the fibres, and the grouping and distribution of the fascia, made the
following remark: "It is the fact that the study, however patient,
minute, and thorough it might be, of this nerve-skein can never enable
us to know what a state of consciousness is, if we do not know it
otherwise; for never across the field of the microscope is there seen
to pass a memory, an emotion, or an act of volition." And, he added,
"he who confines himself to peering into these material structures
remains as ignorant of the phenomena of the mind as the London cabman
who, for ever travelling through the streets of the great city, is
ignorant of what is said and what is going on in the interior of the
houses." This picturesque comparison, the truth of which has never
been questioned, is based on this supposition, that the psychical act
is entirely immaterial and invisible, and therefore escapes the
piercing eye of the microscope. But a deeper analysis of the mind
shows how little exact is this assertion. From the moment each
psychical act implies a material object, we can ask ourselves two
things: (1) Why is it that the anatomist does not discover these
material objects in the interior of the brain? We ought to see them,
for they are material, and therefore visible. We ought to see them
with their aspect and colour, or be able to explain why they are not
seen. In general, all that is described to us in the brain is the
molecular vibrations. But we are not conscious of them. Where, then,
is that of which we are conscious? (2) It should next be explained to
us by what elaboration, transmutation, or metamorphosis a molecular
disturbance, which is material, can transform itself into the objects
which are equally material.

This is the criticism we have to address to materialism. Until proof
to the contrary, I hold it to be irrefutable.


PARALLELISM

For this exposition to follow the logical order of ideas, the
discussion on materialism should be immediately succeeded by that on
parallelism. These two doctrines are near akin; they resemble each
other as the second edition of a book, revised and corrected,
resembles the first. Parallelism is the materialist doctrine of those
forewarned folk, who have perceived the errors committed and endeavour
to avoid them, while cherishing all that can be saved of the condemned
doctrine. That which philosophers criticised in materialism was the
misunderstanding of the principle of heterogeneity. The parallelists
have seen this mistake, and have taken steps to respect this
principle: we shall see in what way. They are especially prudent, and
they excel in avoiding being compromised. They put forth their
hypothesis as a provisional one, and they vaunt its convenience. It
is, say they, a practical method of avoiding many difficulties; it
becomes for philosophers an equivalent of that phrase which so many
timorous ministers repeat: "Above all, no scrapes!"

Let us study the exact point on which parallelism has amended
materialism. We have seen that every materialist doctrine is the
expression of this idea, that physical phenomena are the only ones
that are determined, measurable, explicable, and scientific. This idea
does wonders in the natural sciences, but is at fault when, from the
physical, we pass into the moral world, and we have seen how the
materialistic doctrine fails when it endeavours to attach the physical
to the mental. There are then two great difficulties which the
materialistic explanation finds before it; one is a difficulty of
mechanism and the other of genesis. By connecting the mind with the
brain, like a function to its organ, this doctrine seeks to solve
these two problems, and with what little success we have seen.

Parallelism, has tried to avoid these two problems; not only does it
not solve them, but it arranges so as not to propound them. The
expedient adopted consists in avoiding the meeting of the physical and
the mental; instead of placing them end to end and welding one to the
other, they are placed in parallel fashion side by side. To explain
their correlation, which so many observations vaguely demonstrate, the
following hypothesis is advanced. Physical and psychical life form two
parallel currents, which never mingle their waters; to every state of
definite consciousness there corresponds the counterpart of an equally
definite state of the nerve centres; the fact of consciousness has its
antecedents and its consequences in the consciousness; and the
physical fact equally takes its place in a chain of physical facts.
The two series are thus evolved, and correspond strictly to each other
according to a necessary law; so that the scholar who was perfectly
instructed, and to whom one of these states was presented, could
describe its fellow. But never does any of the terms of one series
influence the terms of the other.

Observation and the testimony of the consciousness seem to attest this
dual progress; but they are, according to the parallelist hypothesis,
illusions. When I move my arm by a voluntary act, it is not my will,
_qua_ act of consciousness, which determines the movement of the
arm--for this is a material fact. The movement is produced by the
coming into play of groups of muscles. Each muscle, composed of a
semi-fluid substance, being excited, contracts in the direction of its
greatest length. The excitant of the muscles is also a material fact,
a material influx which starts from the motor cells of the encephalon,
and of which we know the course down through the pyramidal fascium,
the anterior roots of the spinal cord, and the nerves of the periphery
to its termination in the motor plates of the muscles. It is this
excitement which is the physical, direct, and veritable cause of
voluntary movements. And it is the same with all acts and signs, all
expressions of our conscious states; the trembling of fear, the
redness of anger, the movements of walking, down to the words we
utter--all these are physical effects produced by physical processes,
which act physically, and of which the mental counterpart has in
itself no effective action.

Let it be understood that I am here pointing out one of the forms, and
that the most usual, of the parallelist theory. Each author varies it
according to his fancy; some widen the correspondence between the
physical and the moral, others prefer to narrow it. At one time a
vague relation is supposed which is only true on a large scale, and is
a union rather than an equivalence. At another, it is an exact
counterpart, a complete duplicate in which the smallest physical event
corresponds to a mental one.

In one of the forms of this theory that has been recently invented,
parallelists have gone so far as to assert that there exists no real
cohesion in the mental chain, and that no mental phenomenon can have
the property of provoking another mental phenomenon by an act of true
causality. It is within the nervous tissue, they say, that the nexus
of psychic states should be enclosed. These should succeed in time
without being directly connected with one another; they should succeed
because the physical basis of them is excited in succession. Some of
them would be like an air on the piano: the notes follow each other
and arrange themselves into melodies, not by any affinity proper to
themselves, but because the keys of the instrument are struck in the
required order.

I said a little while ago that parallelism was a perfected
materialism. The reason of this will be understood. It is a doctrine
which preserves the determinism of physical facts while avoiding the
compromising of itself in the difficult explanation of the connection
between the soul and the body. It remains scientific without raising a
metaphysical heresy.

Bain is one of those who have most clearly expressed, not only the
advantages, but also the aspirations of this theory (_Mind and Body_,
p. 130):--

"We have every reason for believing," he says, "that there is in company
with all our mental processes, _an unbroken material succession_. From
the ingress of a sensation, to the outgoing responses in action, the
mental succession is not for an instant dissevered from a physical
succession. A new prospect bursts upon the view; there is mental result
of sensation, emotion, thought--terminating in outward displays of
speech or gesture. Parallel to this mental series is the physical series
of facts, the successive agitation of the physical organs, called the
eye, the retina, the optic nerve, optic centres, cerebral hemispheres,
outgoing nerves, muscles, &c. While we go the round of the mental circle
of sensation, emotion, and thought, there is an unbroken physical circle
of effects. It would be incompatible with everything we know of the
cerebral action, to suppose that the physical chain ends abruptly in a
physical void, occupied by an immaterial substance; which immaterial
substance, after working alone, imparts its results to the other edge
of the physical break, and determines the active response--two shores of
the material with an intervening ocean of the immaterial. There is, in
fact, no rupture of nervous continuity. The only tenable supposition is,
that mental and physical proceed together, as undivided twins."

On reading this passage it is easy to see the idea which forms the
basis of the doctrine. It is, as I have already said, the fetichism of
mechanics: parallelism takes its inspiration from this quite as
directly as does materialism, but with more skill, inasmuch as it
avoids the most dangerous question, that of the interaction of physics
and morals, and replaces it by an hypothesis much resembling
Leibnitz's hypothesis of the pre-established harmony, On the other
hand, a second merit of this prudent doctrine is the avoiding the
question of genesis. It does not seek for the origin of thought, but
places this last in a relation of parallelism with the manifestations
of matter; and in the same way that parallel lines prolonged _ad
infinitum_ never meet, so the partisans of this doctrine announce
their resolution not to inquire how the actual state of things has
been formed, nor how it will end if, for example, one of the terms
should disappear by the death of the bodily organism.

Notwithstanding so many precautions, criticisms have not been wanting;
only they would seem not to have touched the weak part of the
doctrine and not to be decisive. We will only run through them
briefly.

It has been said: there is no logical necessity which forces us to
refuse to the consciousness the privilege of acting in complete
independence of the nervous mechanism.

It has also been said: it is by no means certain that any nervous
mechanism can be invented which imitates and, if need were, could
replace an intellectual act. For instance, what association of nerve
cells, what molecular action, can imitate an act of comparison which
enables us to see a resemblance between two objects? Let it be
supposed, for example, that the resemblance of two impressions come
from a partial identity, and that the latter has for material support
an identity in the seat or the form of the corresponding nervous
influx. But what is identity? How can it be conceived without
supposing resemblance, of which it is but a form? How, then, can the
one be explained by the other? Thus, for instance, at the bottom of
all our intellectual acts, there is a certain degree of belief. Can
any material combination be found which corresponds thereto?

There is one last objection, the most serious of all. Parallelism, by
establishing a fixed and invariable relation between the physical and
the moral, ends by denying the role of this last, since the physical
mechanism is sufficient to draw to itself all the effects which
general belief attributes to the moral. The parallelists on this point
go very much further than the materialists; the latter at least
concede that the consciousness is of some use, since they compared it
to a function or a secretion, and, after all, a secretion is a useful
liquid. The parallelists are so strongly convinced that mechanism is
alone efficacious that they come to deny any role to thought. The
consciousness for them has no purpose: yet it keeps company with its
object. The metaphors which serve to define it, part of which have
been imagined by Huxley, are all of a passive nature. Such is the
light, or the whistling noise which accompanies the working of an
engine, but does not act on its machinery. Or, the shadow which dogs
the steps of the traveller. Or a phosphorescence lighting up the
traces of the movements of the brain.

It has also been said that the consciousness is a useless luxury. Some
have even gone further, and the fine and significant name of
_epiphenomenon_, that has been given to thought, well translates that
conception, according to which semi-realities may exist in nature.

All these objections certainly carry great weight, but they are not
capable of killing the doctrine--they only scotch it.

I think there is a radical vice in parallelism, which till now has not
been sufficiently indicated, and I ask what can really remain of the
whole edifice when this vice has been once exposed?

Parallelism implies a false idea, which we have already come across
when discussing materialism. It is the idea that a phenomenon of
consciousness constitutes one complete whole.

The error proceeds from the use of concepts which cause the reality to
be lost sight of. The reality shows that every phenomenon of
consciousness consists in a mode of activity, an aggregate of
faculties which require an object to fasten on to and so realise
themselves, and that this object is furnished by matter. What we
always note in intuition is the union, the incarnation of
consciousness-matter. Our thoughts, our memories, our reasonings have
as object sensations, images--that is to say, things which, strictly
speaking, are as material as our own brains. It is therefore rather
childish to put all these workings of the spirit on another plane and
in another world than the workings of the brain since they are in
great part of the same nature as the last named and they contain so
many material elements. Now if we re-establish facts as they are, if
we admit a parallelism between physical phenomena, on the one hand,
and phenomena at once physical and psychical, on the other, the
parallelist hypothesis loses every sort of meaning. It ceases to
present to us the image of two phenomena of an absolutely different
order, which are found coupled together like the two faces of a unity,
the front and back of a page, the right and wrong side of a stuff. If
there is anything material in the psychical part, the opposition of
nature no longer exists between the two terms; they become identical.

Very often, certain parallelists, after thinking they have discovered
the duality of nature, endeavour to bring it back to unity by
supposing that the two faces of the reality are as two effects of one
unique reality, inaccessible to our senses and underlying appearances.
Why go so far afield to seek unity? It is trouble in vain: for it is
to be found in the phenomenon itself.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 46: I can quote two observations in support of this. M.
BRIEUX, to whom I was relating this part of my argument, stopped me,
saying, "You have guessed right; I represent to myself thought issuing
from brain in the form of an electric gleam." Dr. SIMON also informed
me, during the reading of my manuscript, that he saw "thought floating
over the brain like an _ignis fatuus_."]



