
CHAPTER IV

MODERN THEORIES


It may be thought that the objection taken above to parallelism and
materialism is personal to myself, because I have put it forward as
the consequence of my analysis of the respective shares of thought and
matter in every act of cognition. This is not so. I am here in harmony
with other philosophers who arrived at the same conclusions long
before me, and it may be useful to quote them.

We will begin with the prince of idealists, Berkeley. "'Everything you
know or conceive other than spirits,' says Philonous to Hylas, 'is but
your ideas; so then when you say that all ideas are occasioned by
impressions made in the brain, either you conceive this brain or you
do not. If you conceive it, you are in that case talking of ideas
imprinted in an idea which is the cause of this very idea, which is
absurd. If you do not conceive it, you are talking unintelligibly, you
are not forming a reasonable hypothesis.' 'How can it be reasonable,'
he goes on to say, 'to think that the brain, which is a sensible
thing, _i.e._ which can be apprehended by the senses--an idea
consequently which only exists in the mind--is the cause of our other
ideas?'"[47]

Thus, in the reasoning of Berkeley, the function of the brain cannot
explain the production of ideas, because the brain itself is an idea,
and an idea cannot be the cause of all our other ideas.

M. Bergson's argument is quite similar, although he takes a very
different standpoint from that of idealism. He takes the word image in
the vaguest conceivable sense. To explain the meaning of this word he
simply says: "images which are perceived when I open my senses, and
unperceived when I close them." He also remarks that the external
objects are images, and that the brain and its molecular disturbances
are likewise images. And he adds, "For this image which I call
cerebral disturbance to generate the external images, it would have to
contain them in one way or another, and the representation of the
whole material universe would have to be implicated in that of this
molecular movement. Now, it is enough to enunciate such a proposition
to reveal its absurdity."[48]

It will be seen that this reasoning is the same as Berkeley's, though
the two authors are reasoning on objects that are different; according
to Berkeley, the brain and the states of conscience are psychical
states; according to Bergson, the definition of the nature of these
two objects designated by the term image is more comprehensive, but
the essential of his argument is independent of this definition. It is
enough that the two terms should be of similar nature for one to be
unable to generate the other.

My own argument in its turn comes rather near the preceding ones. For
the idea of Berkeley, and the image of Bergson, I substitute the term
matter. I say that the brain is matter, and that the perception of any
object is perception of matter, and I think it is not easy to explain
how from this brain can issue this perception, since that would be to
admit that from one matter may come forth another matter. There is
certainly here a great difficulty.

M. Bergson has thought to overcome it by attacking it in the following
way. He has the very ingenious idea of changing the position of the
representation in relation to the cerebral movement. The materialist
places the representation after this movement and derives it from the
movement; the parallelist places it by the side of the movement and in
equivalence to it. M. Bergson places it before the movement, and
supposes it to play with regard to it the part of exciting cause, or
simply that of initiator. This cerebral movement becomes an effect of
the representation and a motor effect. Consequently the nervous system
passes into the state of motor organ: the sensory nerves are not, as
supposed, true sensory nerves, but they are the commencements of motor
nerves, the aim of which is to lead the motor excitements to the
centres which play the part of commutators and direct the current,
sometimes by one set of nerves, sometimes by others. The nervous
system is like a tool held in the hand: it is a vehicle for action, we
are told, and not a substratum for cognition. I cannot here say with
what ingenuity, with what powerful logic, and with what close
continuity of ideas M. Bergson develops his system, nor with what
address he braves its difficulties.

His mind is remarkable alike for its power of systematisation and its
suppleness of adaptation. Before commencing to criticise him, I am
anxious to say how much I admire him, how much I agree with him
throughout the critical part of his work, and how much I owe to the
perusal of his book, _Matiere et Memoire_. Though I was led into
metaphysics by private needs, though some of the ideas I have set
forth above were conceptions of my own (for example, the criticism of
the mechanical theory of matter, and the definition of sensation),
before I had read M. Bergson's book, it cannot be denied that its
perusal has so strongly modified my ideas that a great part of these
are due to him without my feeling capable of exactly discerning which;
for ideas have a much more impersonal character than observations and
experiments. It would therefore have been ungrateful to criticise him
before having rendered him this tribute.

There are, in M. Bergson's theory, a few assertions which surprise us
a little, like everything which runs counter to old habits. It has
always been supposed that our body is the receptacle of our
psychological phenomena. We store our reminiscences in our nerve
centres; we put the state of our emotions in the perturbations of
certain apparatus; we find the physical basis of our efforts of will
and of attention in the sensations of muscular tension born in our
limbs or trunk. Directly we believe that the nervous system is no
longer the depository of these states, we must change their domicile;
and where are they to be placed? Here the theory becomes obscure and
vague, and custom renders it difficult to understand the situation of
the mind outside the body. M. Bergson places memory in planes of
consciousness far removed from action, and perception he places in the
very object we perceive.

If I look at my bookcase, my thought is in my books; if I look at the
sky, my thought is in a star.[49] It is very difficult to criticise
ideas such as these, because one is never certain that one understands
them. I will therefore not linger over them, notwithstanding the
mistrust which they inspire in me.

But what seems to me to require proof is the function M. Bergson is
led to attribute to the sensory nerves. To his mind, it is not exact
to say that the excitement of a sensory nerve excites sensation. This
would be a wrong description, for, according to him, every nerve, even
a sensory one, serves as a motor; it conducts the disturbance which,
passing through the central commutator, flows finally into the
muscles. But then, whence comes it that I think I feel a sensation
when my sensory nerve is touched? Whence comes it that a pressure on
the epitrochlear nerve gives me a tingling in the hand? Whence comes
it that a blow on the eyeball gives me a fleeting impression of light?
One must read the page where M. Bergson struggles against what seems
to me the evidence of the facts. "If, for one reason or another," he
says, "the excitement no longer passes, it would be strange if the
corresponding perception took place, since this perception would then
put our body in relation with points of space which would no longer
invite it to make a choice. Divide the optic nerve of any animal; the
disturbance starting from the luminous point is no longer transmitted
to the brain, and thence to the motor nerves. The thread which
connected the external object to the motor mechanism of the animal by
enveloping the optic nerve, is severed; the visual perception has
therefore become powerless, and in this powerlessness consists
unconsciousness." This argument is more clever than convincing. It is
not convincing, because it consists in exaggerating beyond all reason
a very real fact, that of the relation which can be discovered between
our sensations and our movements. We believe, with M. Bergson, that it
is absolutely correct to see in action the end and the _raison d'etre_
of our intelligence and our sensibility. But does it follow that every
degree, every shade, every detail of sensation, even the most
insignificant, has any importance for the action? The variations of
sensibility are much more numerous than those of movements and of
adaptation; very probably, as is seen in an attentive study of
infancy, sensibility precedes the power of motion in its
differentiations. A child shows an extraordinary acuteness of
perception at an age when its hand is still very clumsy. The
correlation, then, is not absolute. And then even if it were so, it
would not follow that the suppression of any movement would produce by
rebound the suppression of the sensation to which this movement
habitually corresponds. On this hypothesis, a sensation which loses
its motor effect becomes useless. Be it so; but this does not prove
that the uselessness of a sensation is synonymous with insensibility.
I can very well imagine the movement being suppressed and the useless
sensation continuing to evoke images and to be perceived. Does not
this occur daily? There are patients who, after an attack of paralysis
remain paralysed in one limb, which loses the voluntary movement, but
does not necessarily lose its sensibility. Many clear cases are
observed in which this dissociation takes place.

I therefore own that I cannot follow M. Bergson in his deduction. As a
physiologist, I am obliged to believe firmly in the existence of the
sensory nerves, and therefore I continue to suppose that our conscious
sensations are consequent to the excitement of these nerves and
subordinate to their integrity. Now, as therein lies, unless I
mistake, the essential postulate, the heart of M. Bergson's theory, by
not admitting it I must regretfully reject the whole.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 47: I borrow this quotation from RENOUVIER, _Le
Personnellisme_, p. 263.]

[Footnote 48: _Matiere et Memoire_, p. 3. The author has returned to
this point more at length in a communication to the Congres de
Philosophie de Geneve, in 1904. See _Revue de Metaphysique et de
Morale_, Nov. 1904, communication from H. BERGSON entitled "Le
Paralogisme psycho-physiologique." Here is a passage from this article
which expresses the same idea: "To say that the image of the
surrounding world issues from this image (from the cerebral movement),
or that it expresses itself by this image, or that it arises as soon
as this image is suggested, or that one gives it to one's self by
giving one's self this image, would be to contradict one's self; since
these two images, the outer world and the intra-cerebral movement,
have been supposed to be of the same nature, and the second image is,
by the hypothesis, an infinitesimal part of the field of
representation, while the first fills the whole of it."]

[Footnote 49: _Matiere et Memoire_, p. 31]



