
CHAPTER II

SPIRITUALISM[43] AND IDEALISM


Flournoy has somewhere written that the chief interest of the systems
of metaphysics lies less in the intellectual constructions they raise
than in the aspirations of the mind and of the heart to which they
correspond. Without taking literally this terribly sceptical opinion,
it would be highly useful to begin the study of any metaphysical
system by the psychology of its author. The value of each system would
be better understood, and their reasons would be comprehended.

This book is too short to permit us to enter into such biographical
details. I am obliged to take the metaphysical systems _en bloc_, as
if they were anonymous works, and to efface all the shades,
occasionally so curious, that the thought of each author has
introduced into them. Yet, however brief our statement, it seems
indispensable to indicate clearly the physical or moral idea
concealed within each system.


SPIRITUALISM

It is known that spiritualism is a doctrine which has for its chief
aim the raising of the dignity of man, by recognising in him faculties
superior to the properties of matter. We constantly meet, in
spiritualism, with the notion of superior and inferior, understood not
only in an intellectual sense but also in the sense of moral worth.

It will also be remarked, as a consequence of the above principle,
that a spiritualist does not confine himself to discussing the ideas
of his habitual adversary, the materialist; he finds them not only
false, but dangerous, and is indignant with them; some persons even
ingenuously acknowledge that they hold firmly to certain principles
because they fear to be converted to materialism. I can also discern
in this system a very natural horror of death, which inspires in so
many people, of whom I am one, both hatred and disgust. The
spiritualist revolts against the prospect of a definitive annihilation
of thought, and the system he adopts is largely explained as an effort
towards immortality.

This effort has led to the theory of two substances, the soul and the
body, which are represented as being as thoroughly separated as
possible. The soul has not its origin in the body, and it derives none
of its properties from its fellow; it is a substance created in
complete independence relatively to the body; the soul, in its
essence, has nothing in common with matter. The essence of the soul,
said Descartes, is thought; the essence of the body is extent. It
follows from this that the soul, in its determinations and actions, is
liberated from the laws and necessities of the corporeal nature; it is
a free power, a power of indetermination, capable of choice, capable
of introducing new, unforeseen, and unforeseeable actions, and on this
point opposes itself to corporeal phenomena, which are all subject to
a determinism so rigorous that any event could be foreseen if its
antecedents were known. Another consequence of spiritualism is the
admission of the immortality of the soul, which, being widely distinct
from the body, is not affected by its dissolution; it is, on the
contrary, liberated, since death cuts the link which binds them
together.

But there is a link, and the explanation of this link brings with it
the ruin of the whole system. One is forced to admit that this
principle of the separation of body and soul is liable, in fact, to
many exceptions. Even if they are two isolated powers, the necessities
of life oblige them to enter continually into communication with each
other. In the case of perceptions, it is the body which acts on the
soul and imparts sensations to it; in movements, it is the soul, on
the contrary, which acts on the body, to make it execute its desires
and its will.

Spiritualists must acknowledge that they are at some trouble to
explain this traffic between the two substances; for, with their
respect for the principle of heterogeneity mentioned above, they do
not manage to conceive how that contact of the physical and the mental
can be made which is constantly necessary in the life of relation. By
what means, have they long asked themselves, can that which is only
extent act on that which is only thought? How can we represent to
ourselves this _local_ union of matter with an immaterial principle,
which, by its essence, does not exist in space? The two substances
have been so completely separated, to insure the liberty of the soul
and its superiority over the body, that it has become impossible to
bring them together. The scission has been too complete. They cannot
be sewn together again.

Such are the principal objections raised against spiritualism. These
objections are derived from points of view which are not ours, and we
have therefore no need to estimate their value.

From our point of view, the spiritualist conception has chosen an
excellent starting point. By establishing the consciousness and the
object of cognition as two autonomous powers, neither of which is the
slave of the other, spiritualism has arrived at an opinion of
irreproachable exactness; it is indeed thus that the relations of
these two terms must be stated; each has the same importance and the
right to the same autonomy.[44]

Yet, spiritualism has not rested there, and, by a lamentable
exaggeration, it has thought that the consciousness, which it calls
the soul, could exercise its functions in complete independence of the
object of cognition, which it calls matter. There is the error. It
consists in misunderstanding the incomplete and, as it were, virtual
existence of the consciousness. This refutation is enough as regards
spiritualism. Nothing more need be added.


IDEALISM

Idealism is an exceedingly complex system, varying much with varying
authors, very polymorphous, and consequently very difficult to
discuss.

The ancient hylozoism, the monadism of Leibnitz, and the recent
panpsychism of M. Strong are only different forms of the same
doctrine.

Like spiritualism, with which it is connected by many ties, idealism
is a philosophy which expresses some disdain for matter, but the
thoughts which have sought to shelter themselves under this philosophy
are so varied that it would be perilous to try to define them briefly.

There can be discussed in idealism a certain number of affirmations
which form the basis of the system. None of these affirmations is,
strictly speaking, demonstrated or demonstrable; but they offer very
different degrees of probability, and it is for this reason that we
shall notice them.

Amongst these affirmations there are some that we have already met
with in our study of the definition of sensation; others will be newer
to us.

1. Here is one which seems to arise directly from the facts, and
appears for a long time to have constituted an impregnable position
for idealists. It may be expressed in three words: _esse est percipi_.

Starting with the observation that every time we bear witness to the
existence of the external world, it is because we perceive it,
idealists admit that the existence of this external world shares
exactly the lot of our perception, and that like it it is
discontinuous and intermittent. When we close our eyes, it ceases to
exist, like a torch which is extinguished, and lights up again when we
open them. We have already discussed this proposition, and have shown
that it contains nothing imperative; and we may very well decline to
subscribe to it.

2. There follows a second proposition, barely distinct from the
previous one. There should be nothing else in objects but that which
we perceive, and that of which we have consciousness should be, in the
fullest possible acceptation of the words, the measure of what is.
Consequently there should be no need to seek, under the object
perceived, another and larger reality, a source from which might flow
wider knowledge than that we at present possess. This is as disputable
as the preceding affirmation, and for the same reasons.

3. The third proposition is the heart of the idealist thesis. It is
sometimes presented as a deduction from the foregoing, but it is
nevertheless thoroughly distinct from it, and the preceding
affirmations might legitimately be accepted and this new one rejected.
This proposition may be expressed thus: _Everything that is perceived
is psychical._

It is not only idealists who subscribe to this opinion, however, and
we have seen, when dealing with the definition of matter, that it is
widely spread. We understand by it that the objects we perceive exist
in the consciousness, are of the consciousness, and are constituted
by ideas; the whole world is nothing but idea and representation; and,
since our mind is taken to be of a psychical nature, the result is
that everything, absolutely everything, the person who knows and the
thing known, are all psychical. This is panpsychism. Flournoy, on this
point, says, with a charm coloured by irony: "We henceforth experience
a sweet family feeling, we find ourselves, so to speak, _at home_ in
the midst of this universe ..."[45] We have demonstrated above that
the unity here attained is purely verbal, since we cannot succeed in
suppressing the essential differences of things.

4. Now comes an affirmation on the genesis of things. After having
admitted that the object is an idea of the mind, one of its
manifestations, or one of its moods, the idealists go so far as to say
that the consciousness is the generating power of ideas, and,
consequently, the generating cause of the universe. It is thought
which creates the world. That is the final conclusion.

I indicated, beforehand, in the chapters on the definition of
sensation and on the distinction between the consciousness and the
object, the reasons which lead me to reject the premises of idealism.
It will be sufficient to offer here a criticism on its last
conclusion: "It is the mind that creates the world."

This thesis strikes at the duality--consciousness and object; it gives
the supremacy to the consciousness by making of the object an effect
or property of the former. We can object that this genesis cannot be
clearly represented, and that for the very simple reason that it is
impossible to clearly accept "mind" as a separate entity and distinct
from matter. It is easy to affirm this separation, thanks to the
psittacism of the words, which are here used like counterfeit coin,
but we cannot represent it to ourselves, for it corresponds to
nothing. The consciousness constitutes all that is mental in the
world; nothing else can be described as mental. Now this consciousness
only exists as an act; it is, in other terms, an incomplete form of
existence, which does not exist apart from its object, of which the
true name is matter. It is therefore very difficult to understand this
affirmation, "It is the mind that creates the world," since to be able
to do so, we should have to imagine a consciousness without an object.

Moreover, should we even succeed in doing so, we should be none the
more disposed, on that account, to give assent to this proposition.
Consciousness and matter represent to us the most different and
antithetical terms of the whole of the knowable. Were the hypothesis
to be advanced that one of these elements is capable of engendering
the other, we should immediately have to ask ourselves why this
generating power and this pre-eminence should be attributed to one
rather than to the other element. Who can claim that one solution is
more clear, more reasonable, or more probable than the other?

One of the great advantages of the history of philosophy here asserts
itself. This history shows us that different minds when reflecting on
the same problems have come to conceive solutions which have appeared
to them clear, and consequently were possible; now, as these solutions
are often contradictory, nothing shows better than their collation the
distance between possibility and fact. Thus the materialists, who,
like the idealists, have put forward a genetic theory of the mind,
have conceived mind as produced by matter;--a conception diametrically
opposed to that of the idealists. It may be said that these two
conceptions, opposed in sense, annul each other, and that each of
these two philosophical systems has rendered us service by
demonstrating the error of the opposing system.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 43: It is, perhaps, needless to point out that by
"spiritualism" M. Binet does not mean the doctrine of the
spirit-rappers, whom he, like other scientific writers, designates as
"spiritists," but the creed of all those who believe in disembodied
spirits or existences.--ED.]

[Footnote 44: I do not insist on the difference between my conception
and the spiritualistic conception; my distinction between
consciousness and matter does not correspond, it is evident, to that
of "facts of consciousness" and "physical facts" which spiritualism
sets up.]

[Footnote 45: _Archives de Psychologie_, vol. iv. No. 14, Nov. 1904,
p. 132 (article on Panpsychism).]



