
CHAPTER V

CONCLUSION


A few convinced materialists and parallelists, to whom I have read the
above criticisms on their systems, have found no answer to them; my
criticisms have appeared to them just, but nevertheless they have
continued to abide by their own systems, probably because they were
bound to have one. We do not destroy an erroneous idea when we do not
replace it by another.

This has decided me to set forth some personal views which,
provisionally, and for want of better, might be substituted for the
old doctrines. Before doing this, I hasten to explain their character,
and to state openly that they are only hypotheses.

I know that metaphysicians rarely make avowals of this kind. They
present their systems as a well-connected whole, and they set forth
its different parts, even the boldest of them, in the same dogmatic
tone, and without warning that we ought to attach very unequal degrees
of confidence to these various parts. This is a deplorable method, and
to it is perhaps due the kind of disdain that observers and
experimentalists feel for metaphysics--a disdain often without
justification, for all is not false, and everything is not
hypothetical, in metaphysics. There are in it demonstrations,
analyses, and criticisms, especially the last, which appear to me as
exact and as certain as an observation or experiment. The mistake lies
in mixing up together in a statement, without distinction, the certain
with the probable, and the probable with the possible.

Metaphysicians are not wholly responsible for this fault of method;
and I am much inclined to think that it is the natural consequence of
the abuse of speculation. It is especially by the cultivation of the
sciences of observation that we foster in ourselves the precious sense
of proof, because we can check it any minute by experimental
verification. When we are working at a distance from the facts, this
sense of proof gets thinner, and there is lost that feeling of
responsibility and fear of seeing one's assertions contradicted by a
decisive countervailing observation, which is felt by every observer.
One acquires the unbearable pride which I note in Kant, and one
abandons one's self to the spirit of construction. I am speaking from
personal experience. I have several times detected within me this bad
spirit of construction, I have been seeking to group several facts of
observation under the same idea, and then I have discovered that I was
belittling and depreciating those facts which did not fit in with the
idea.

The hypothesis I now present on the relations of the mind and the
brain has, for me, the advantage of bringing to light the precise
conditions which a solution of this great problem must satisfy for
this solution to be worthy of discussion.

These conditions are very numerous. I shall not indicate them all
successively; but here are two which are particularly important.

1. The manifestations of the consciousness are conditioned by the
brain. Let us suspend, by any means, the activity of the encephalic
mass, by arresting the circulation of the blood for example, and the
psychic function is at once inhibited. Compress the carotid, and you
obtain the clouding-over of the intellect. Or, instead of a total
abolition, you can have one in detail; sever a sensory nerve with the
bistoury, and all the sensations which that nerve transmits to the
brain are suppressed. Consciousness appears only when the molecular
disturbance reaches the nerve centres; everything takes place in the
same way as if this disturbance released the consciousness.
Consciousness also accompanies or follows certain material states of
the nerve centres, such as the waves which traverse the sensory
nerves, which exercise reflex action in the cells, and which propagate
themselves in the motor nerves. It is to the production, the
distribution, and the integrity of this nervous influx that the
consciousness is closely linked. It there finds one of the conditions
of its apparition.

2. On the other hand, the consciousness remains in complete ignorance
of these intra-cerebral phenomena. It does not perceive the nerve-wave
which sets it in motion, it knows nothing of its peculiarities, of its
trajectory, or the length of its course. In this sense it may be said
that it is in no degree an anatomist; it has no idea of all the
peculiarities of the nerve-wave which form part of its cerebral
history from the moment when these peculiarities are out of relation
with the properties of external objects.

One sometimes wonders that our consciousness is not aware that the
objects we perceive with our two eyes correspond to a double
undulation, namely, that of the right and that of the left, and that
the image is reversed on the retina, so that it is the rods of the
right which are impressed by objects on our left, and the rods of the
upper part by objects below our eyes. These are, it has been very
justly said, factitious problems, imaginary difficulties which do not
exist. There is no need to explain, for instance, direct vision by a
reversed image, because our consciousness is not aware that the image
on the retina is reversed. In order to take account of this, we should
require another eye to see this image. This answer appears
particularly to the point. It will be found that it is absolutely
correct if we reflect that this case of the unfelt inversion of the
image on the retina is but one example of the anatomical ignorance of
the consciousness.

It might also be declared, in the same order of ideas, that our
consciousness is ignorant, that excitements of the eye cross each
other at the level of the chiasma, and pass through the internal
capsule, and that the majority of the visual excitements of an eye are
received by the opposite hemisphere.

A rather confused notion of these facts has formed itself in the minds
of several critics, and I can discern the proof of this in the
language they use. It will be said, for example, that the idea exists
in the consciousness or in the mind, and phrases like the following
will be avoided: "I think with my brain"--the suggestion consists in
introducing an idea in the brain--"The nerve cell perceives and
reasons, &c." Ordinarily these forms of speech are criticised because
they appear to have the defect of establishing a confusion between two
irreducible elements, the physical and the mental. I think the error
of language proceeds from another cause, since I do not admit this
distinction between the physical and the mental. I think that the
error consists in supposing vaguely that the consciousness
comprehends intra-cerebral phenomena, whereas it ignores them.

Let me repeat that there is no such thing as intra-cerebral
sensibility. The consciousness is absolutely insensitive with regard
to the dispositions of the cerebral substance and its mode of work. It
is not the nervous undulation which our consciousness perceives, but
the exciting cause of this wave--that is, the external object. The
consciousness does not feel that which is quite close to it, but is
informed of that which passes much further off. Nothing that is
produced inside the cranium interests it; it is solely occupied with
objects of which the situation is extra-cranial. It does not penetrate
into the brain, we might say, but spreads itself like a sheet over the
periphery of the body, and thence springs into the midst of the
external objects.

There is, therefore, I do not say a contradiction, but a very striking
contrast between these two facts. The consciousness is conditioned,
kept up, and nourished by the working of the cerebral substance, but
knows nothing of what passes in the interior of that substance. This
consciousness might itself be compared to a parasitical organism which
plunges its tap roots into the nerve centres, and of which the organs
of perception, borne on long stalks, emerge from the cranium and
perceive everything outside that cranium. But this is, of course,
only a rough image.

Strictly, it is possible to explain this distribution of the
conscience, singular as it is at first sight, by those reasons of
practical utility which are so powerful in the history of evolution.

A living being has to know the world external to himself in order to
adapt and preadapt himself to it, for it is in this outer world that
he finds food, shelter, beings of his own species, and the means of
work, and it is on this world of objects that he acts in every
possible way by the contractions of his muscles. But with regard to
intracephalic actions, they are outside the ordinary sphere of our
actions. There is no daily need to know them, and we can understand
that the consciousness has not found very pressing utilitarian motives
for development in that direction. One must be an histologist or a
surgeon to find an appreciable interest in studying the structure of
the nerve cell or the topography of the cerebral centres.

We can therefore explain well enough, by the general laws of
adaptation, the reason of the absence of what might be called
"cerebral sensibility," but, here as elsewhere, the question of the
"Why" is much easier to solve than that of the "How."

The question of the "How" consists in explaining that the
consciousness, directly aroused by a nerve-wave, does not perceive
this undulation, but in its stead the external object. Let us first
note that between the external object and the nervous influx there is
the relation of cause to effect. It is only the effect which reaches
us, our nerve cells, and our consciousness. What must be explained is
how a cognition (if such a word may be employed here) of the effect
can excite the consciousness of the cause. It is clear that the effect
does not resemble the cause, as quality: the orange I am looking at
has no resemblance with the brain wave which at this moment is
traversing my optic nerve; but this effect contains everything which
was in the cause, or, more exactly, all that part of the cause of
which we have perception. Since it is only by the intermediary of our
nervous system that we perceive the object, all the properties capable
of being perceived are communicated to our nervous system and
inscribed in the nerve wave. The effect produced therefore is the
measure of our perception of the cause. This is absolutely certain.
All bodies possess an infinity of properties which escape our
cognitions; because, as excitants of our organism, these properties
are wanting in the intensity or the quality necessary to make it
vibrate; they have not been tuned in unison with our nervous chords.
And, inversely, all we perceive of the mechanical, physical, and
chemical properties of a body is contained in the vibration this body
succeeds in propagating through our cerebral atmosphere. There is in
this a phenomenon of transmission analogous to that which is produced
when an air of music is sent along a wire; the whole concert heard at
the other extremity of the wire has travelled in the form of delicate
vibrations.

There must therefore exist, though unperceived by our senses, a sort
of kinship between the qualities of the external objects and the
vibrations of our nerves. This is sometimes forgotten. The theory of
the specific energy of the nerves causes it to be overlooked. As we
see that the quality of the sensation depends on the nerve that is
excited, one is inclined to minimise the importance of the excitant.
It is relegated to the position of a proximate cause with regard to
the vibration of the nerve, as the striking of a key on the piano is
the proximate cause of the vibration of a string, which always gives
the same degree of sound whether struck by the forefinger or third
finger, or by a pencil or any other body. It will be seen at once that
this comparison is inexact. The specific property of our nerves does
not prevent our knowing the form of the excitant, and our nerves are
only comparable to piano strings if we grant to these the property of
vibrating differently according to the nature of the bodies which
strike them.

How is it that the nerve wave, if it be the depository of the whole of
the physical properties perceived in the object, resembles it so
little? It is because--this is my hypothesis--these properties, if
they are in the undulation, are not there alone. The undulation is the
work of two collaborators: it expresses both the nature of the object
which provokes it and that of the nervous apparatus which is its
vehicle. It is like the furrow traced in the wax of the phonograph
which expresses the collaboration of an aerial vibration with a
stylus, a cylinder, and a clock-work movement. This engraved line
resembles, in short, neither the phonographic apparatus nor the aerial
vibration, although it results from the combination of the two.

Similarly, I suppose that if the nervous vibration resembles so little
the excitant which gives it birth, it is because the factor nervous
system adds its effect to the factor external object. Each of these
factors represents a different property: the external object
represents a cognition and the nervous system an excitement.

Let us imagine that we succeed in separating these two effects. It
will be conceived, theoretically, that a separation of this kind will
lay bare the hidden resemblances, giving to each collaborator the
part which belongs to it. The excitement, for instance, will be
suppressed, and the cognition will be retained. Is it possible to
make, or at least to imagine, such an analysis? Perhaps: for, of these
two competing activities, one is variable, since it depends on the
constantly changing nature of the objects which come into relation
with us; the other, on the contrary, is a constant, since it expresses
the contribution of our nerve substance, and, though this last is of
very unstable composition, it necessarily varies much less than the
series of excitants. We consequently see faintly that these two
elements differ sufficiently in character for us to be able to suppose
that they are separable by analysis.

But how could this analysis be made? Evidently not by chemical or
physical means: we have no need here of reagents, prisms, centrifugal
apparatus, permeable membranes, or anything of that kind. It will
suffice to suppose that it is the consciousness itself that is the
dialyser. It acts by virtue of its own laws--that is to say, by
changes in intensity. Supposing that sensibility increases for the
variable elements of the undulation, and becomes insensible for the
constant elements. The effect will be the same as a material
dissociation by chemical analysis: there will be an elimination of
certain elements and the retention of others.

Now, all we know of the consciousness authorises us to entrust this
role to it, for it is within the range of its habits. We know that
change is the law of consciousness, that it is effaced when the
excitements are uniform, and is renewed by their differences or their
novelty. A continued or too often repeated excitement ceases in time
to be perceived. It is to condense these facts into a formula that
Bain speaks of the law of relativity of cognition, and, in spite of a
few ambiguities on the part of Spencer and of Bain himself in the
definition of this law,[50] the formula with the sense I have just
indicated is worth preserving.

Let us see what becomes of it, when my hypothesis is adopted. It
explains how certain excitements proceeding from the objects--that is
to say, forming part of the variable element--cease to be perceived
when they are repeated and tend to become constant. _A fortiori_, it
seems to me, should the same law explain how the constant element _par
excellence_, the one which never varies from the first hour, is never
perceived. There is, in the concert of the sounds of nature, an
accompaniment so monotonous that it is no longer perceived; and the
melody alone continues to be heard.

It is in this precisely that my hypothesis consists. We will suppose a
nerve current starting from one of the organs of the senses, when it
is excited by some object or other, and arriving at the centre of the
brain. This current contains all the properties of the object, its
colour, its form, its size, its thousand details of structure, its
weight, its sonorous qualities, &c., &c., properties combined with and
connected by the properties of the nerve-organ in which the current is
propagated. The consciousness remains insensible to those nervous
properties of the current which are so often repeated that they are
annulled; it perceives, on the contrary, its variable and accidental
properties which express the nature of the excitant. By this partial
sensibility, the consciousness lays bare that which, in the nerve
current, represents the object--that is to say, a cognition; and this
operation is equivalent to a transformation of the current into a
perception, image, or idea. There is not, strictly speaking, a
transformation, but an analysis; only, the practical result is the
same as that of a transformation, and is obtained without its being
necessary to suppose the transmutation of a physical into a mental
phenomenon.

Let us place ourselves now at the moment when the analysis I am
supposing to be possible has just been effected. Our consciousness
then assists at the unrolling of representations which correspond to
the outer world. These representations are not, or do not appear to
be, lodged in the brain; and it is not necessary to suppose a special
operation which, taking them in the brain, should project them to the
periphery of our nerves. This transport would be useless, since for
the consciousness the brain does not exist: the brain, with its fibres
and cells, is not felt; it therefore supplies no _datum_ to enable us
to judge whether the representation is external or internal with
regard to it. In other words, the representation is only localised in
relation to itself; there is no determinate position other than that
of one representation in relation to another. We may therefore reject
as inexact the pretended law of eccentricity of the physiologists, who
suppose that sensation is first perceived as it were centrally, and
then, by an added act, is localised at the peripheric extremity of the
nerve. This argument would only be correct if we admitted that the
brain is perceived by the consciousness of the brain. I have already
said that the consciousness is not an anatomist, and that therefore
this problem does not present itself.

Such as it is, this hypothesis appears to me to present the advantage
of explaining the reason why our consciousness coincides, in certain
circumstances, with the actions of the brain, and, in others, does not
come near them. In other words, it contains an explanation of the
unconscious. I can show this by quoting certain exact facts, of which
the explanation has been hitherto thought to present difficulties, but
which become very easy to understand on the present hypothesis. The
first of these facts relates to the psychology of the motor current.
This current has been a great feature in the studies which have been
made on the feeling of effort and on the physical basis of the will.
The motor current is that which, starting from the cerebral cells of
the motor region, travels by way of the fibres of the pyramidal tract
into the muscles of the body; and it is centrifugal in direction.
Researches have been made as to whether we are or may be conscious of
this current; or rather, the question has been put in somewhat
different terms. It has been asked whether a psychological state can
be the counterpart of this motor current,--if, for example, the
feeling of mental effort produced in us at the moment of executing a
difficult act or of taking a grave resolution, might not have this
motor current for a basis.

The opinion which has prevailed is in the negative. We have
recognised--a good deal on the faith of experiment, and a little also
for theoretical reasons--that no sensation is awakened by the
centrifugal current. As to the sensation of effort, it has been agreed
to place it elsewhere. We put it among the centripetal sensations
which, are produced as the movement outlines itself, and which proceed
from the contracted muscles, the stretched ligaments, and the
frictional movements of the articulations. Effort would therefore form
part of all the psychical phenomenology, which is the duplicate of
those sensory currents which are centripetal in direction.

In the long run, I can see no sort of theoretical reason for
subordinating the consciousness to the direction of the nerve current,
and for supposing that the consciousness is aroused when this current
is centripetal, and that it cannot follow the centrifugal current. But
this point matters little. My hypothesis would fairly well explain why
the motor current remains unconscious; it explains the affair by
taking into consideration the nature of this current and not its
direction. This current is a motor one because it is born in the
central cells, because it is a discharge from these cells, and is of
entirely nervous origin. Since it does not correspond with the
perception of an object--the ever varying object--it is always the
same by nature. It does not carry with it in its monotonous course the
_debris_ of an object, as does the sensory current. Thus it can flow
without consciousness.

This same kind of hypothesis supplies us with the reasons why a given
sensory current may be, according to circumstances, either conscious
or unconscious. The consciousness resulting from the analysis of the
molecular wave is, as it were, a supplementary work which may be
subsequently added to the realised wave. The propagation of the wave
is the essential fact--there is always time to become conscious of it
afterwards. It is thus that we happen, in moments of abstraction, to
remain insensible to certain even very powerful excitements. Our
nervous system registers them, nevertheless, and we can find them
again, later on, within the memory. This is the effect of a belated
analysis.

The converse phenomenon occurs much more frequently. We remark many
actions and perceptions which occur the first time with consciousness,
emotion, and effort. Then, when they are repeated, as coordination
becomes stronger and easier, the reflex consciousness of the operation
becomes feebler. This is the law of habit, which slowly carries us
towards automatism. These observations have even been extended, and
the endeavour made to apply them to the explanation of the origin of
reflex actions and of instincts which have all started with
consciousness. This is a rather bold attempt, for it meets with many
serious difficulties in execution; but the idea seems fairly correct,
and is acceptable if we may limit it. It is certain that the
consciousness accompanies the effort towards the untried, and perishes
as soon as it is realised. Whence comes this singular dilemma
propounded to it by nature: to create something new or perish? It
really seems that my hypothesis explains this. Every new act is
produced by nerve currents, which contain many of those variable
elements which the consciousness perceives; but, in proportion as the
action of the brain repeats itself and becomes more precise and more
exact, this variable element becomes attenuated, falls to its lowest
pitch, and may even disappear in the fixation of habit and instinct.

My hypothesis much resembles the system of parallelism. It perfects
it, as it seems to me, as much as the latter has perfected
materialism. We indeed admit a kind of parallelism between the
consciousness and the object of cognition; but these two series are
not independent, not simply placed in juxtaposition as is possible in
ordinary parallelism; they are united and fused together so as to
complete each other. This new theory appears to me to represent a
better form of the series of attempts which have been inspired by the
common necessity of making the phenomena of consciousness accord with
the determinism of physical facts.

I hold fast to this physical determinism, and accept a strictly
mechanical conception of the functions of the nervous system. In my
idea, the currents which pass through the cerebral mass follow each
other without interruption, from the sensorial periphery to the motor
periphery; it is they, and they alone, which excite the movements of
the body by acting on the muscles. Parallelism recognises all these
things, and I do likewise.

Let us now see the advantages of this new system. First, it contains
no paralogism, no logical or psychological error, since it does not
advance the supposition that the mental differs by its nature from the
physical phenomenon. We have discussed above the consequences of this
error, They are here avoided. In the second place, it is explanatory,
at least in a certain measure, since the formula we employ allows us
to understand, better than by the principle of a simple juxtaposition,
why certain nerve currents flow in the light of consciousness, while
others are plunged into the darkness of unconsciousness. This law of
consciousness, which Bain called the law of relativity, becomes, when
embodied with my theory of the relations of the physical to the moral,
an explanation of the distribution of consciousness through the
actions of the brain.

I ask myself whether the explanation I have devised ought to be
literally preserved. Perhaps not. I have endeavoured less to present a
ready-made solution than to indicate the direction in which we ought
to look for one. The law of consciousness which I have used to explain
the transformation of a nerve current into perception and images is
only an empirical law produced by the generalisation of particular
observations. Until now there has been, so far as I know, no attempt
to ascertain whether this law of consciousness, notwithstanding the
general nature which some authors incline to ascribe to it, might not
explain itself by some more general facts, and might not fit, as a
particular case, into a more comprehensive frame. To be brief, this is
very possible. I have not troubled myself about it, and I have made a
transcendental use of this empirical law; for I have impliedly
supposed it to be a first principle, capable of accounting for the
development of the consciousness, but itself incapable of explanation.

If other observers discover that that which to me has appeared
inexplicable, may be explained by quite peculiar causes, it is clear
that my theory must be abandoned or modified. New theories must then
be sought for, which will probably consist in recognising different
properties in the consciousness. A little thought will discover
several, I have no doubt. By way of suggestion, I will indicate one
of these hypothetical possibilities: "The consciousness has the
faculty of reading in the effect that which existed in the cause." It
is not rash to believe that by working out this idea, a certain
solution would be discovered. Moreover, the essential is, I repeat,
less to find a solution than to take account of the point which
requires one; and metaphysics seem to me especially useful when it
shows us where the gap in our knowledge exists and what are the
conditions required to fill this gap.

Above all, I adhere to this idea, which has been one of the guiding
forces of this book: there exists at the bottom of all the phenomena
of the intelligence, a duality. To form a true phenomenon, there must
be at once a consciousness and an object. According to passing
tendencies, either of temperament or of fashion, preponderance has
been given sometimes to one of the terms of this couple, sometimes to
the other. The idealist declares: "Thought creates the world." The
materialist answers: "The matter of the brain creates thought."
Between these two extreme opinions, the one as unjustifiable as the
other in the excesses they commit, we take up an intermediate
position. Looking at the balance, we see no argument capable of being
placed in the scale of the consciousness which may not be neutralised
by an argument placed in the scale of the object; and if we had to
give our final verdict we should say: "The consciousness and matter
have equal rights," thus leaving to every one the power to place, in
this conception of an equality of rights, the hopes of survival of
which his heart has need.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 50: The _equivoque_ perpetrated by BAIN and SPENCER consists
in supposing that the consciousness bears solely on differences. This
is going too far. I confine myself to admitting that, if sensation is
not changed from time to time, the consciousness becomes weaker and
disappears.]



