
CHAPTER I

THE MIND HAS AN INCOMPLETE LIFE


The problem of the union of the mind and the body is not one of those
which present themselves in pure speculation; it has its roots in
experimental facts, and is forced upon us by the necessity of
explaining observations such as those we are about to quote.

The force of our consciousness, the correctness of our judgments, our
tempers and our characters, the state of health of our minds, and also
their troubles, their weaknesses, and even their existence, are all in
a state of strict dependence on the condition of our bodies, more
precisely with that of our nervous systems, or, more precisely still,
with the state of those three pounds of proteid substance which each
of us has at the back of his forehead, and which are called our
brains. This is daily demonstrated by thousands upon thousands of
observations.

The question is to know how this union of the body with the
consciousness is to be explained, it being assumed that the two terms
of this union present a great difference in their nature. The easier
it seems to demonstrate that this union exists, the more difficult it
appears to explain how it is realised; and the proof of this
difficulty is the number of divergent interpretations given to it.
Were it a simple question of fact, the perpetual discussions and
controversies upon it would not arise.

Many problems here present themselves. The first is that of the
genesis or origin of the consciousness. It has to be explained how a
psychical phenomenon can appear in the midst of material ones. In
general, one begins by supposing that the material phenomena are
produced first; they consist, for instance, in the working of the
nervous centres. All this is physical or chemical, and therefore
material. Then at a given moment, after this mechanical process, a
quite different phenomenon emerges. This is thought, consciousness,
emotion. Then comes the question whether this production of thought in
the midst of physical phenomena is capable of explanation, and how
thought is connected with its physical antecedents. What is the nature
of the link between them? Is it a relation of cause to effect, of
genesis? or a coincidence? or the interaction of two distinct forces?
Is this relation constant or necessary? Can the mind enjoy an
existence independent of the brain? Can it survive the death of the
brain?

The second question is that of knowing what is the role, the utility,
and the efficacity of the psychical phenomenon. Once formed, this
phenomenon evolves in a certain direction and assumes to us who have
consciousness of it a very great importance. What is its action on the
material phenomena of the brain which surround it? Does it develop
according to laws of its own, which have no relation to the laws of
brain action? Does it exercise any action on these intra-cerebral
functions? Does it exercise any action on the centrifugal currents
which go to the motor nerves? Is it capable of exciting a movement? or
is it deprived of all power of creating effect?

We will briefly examine the principal solutions which the imagination
of mankind has found for these very difficult problems. Some of the
best known of these solutions bear the names of spiritualism,
materialism, parallelism, and monism. We will speak of these and of
some others also.

Before beginning our critical statement, let us recall some of the
results of our previous analyses which here intrude themselves, to use
the ambitious language of Kant, as the prolegomena to every future
solution which claims the title of science. In fact, we are now no
longer at the outset of our investigation. We have had to acknowledge
the exactness of certain facts, and we are bound to admit their
consequences. Notably, the definition of psychical phenomena at which
we arrived, not without some trouble, will henceforth play a rather
large part in our discussion. It will force us to question a great
metaphysical principle which, up till now, has been almost universally
considered as governing the problem of the union of the mind with the
body.

This principle bears the name of the _axiom of heterogeneity_, or the
principle of _psycho-physical dualism_. No philosopher has more
clearly formulated it, and more logically deduced its consequences,
than Flournoy. This author has written a little pamphlet called
_Metaphysique et Psychologie_, wherein he briefly sets forth all the
known systems of metaphysics by reducing them to the so-called
principle of heterogeneity; after this, the same principle enables him
to "execute" them. He formulates it in the following terms: "body and
mind, consciousness and the molecular cerebral movement of the brain,
the psychical fact and the physical fact, although simultaneous, are
heterogeneous, unconnected, irreducible, and obstinately two."[41] The
same author adds: "this is evident of itself, and axiomatic. Every
physical, chemical, or physiological event, in the last resort, simply
consists, according to science, in a more or less rapid displacement
of a certain number of material elements, in a change of their mutual
distances or of their modes of grouping. Now, what can there be in
common, I ask you, what analogy can you see, between this drawing
together or moving apart of material masses in space, and the fact of
having a feeling of joy, the recollection of an absent friend, the
perception of a gas jet, a desire, or of an act of volition of any
kind?" And further on: "All that we can say to connect two events so
absolutely dissimilar is, that they take place _at the same time_....
This does not mean that we wish to reduce them to unity, or to join
them together by the link of causality ... it is impossible to
conceive any real connection, any internal relation between these two
unconnected things."

Let us not hesitate to denounce as false this proposition which is
presented to us as an axiom. On looking closely into it, we shall
perceive that the principle of heterogeneity does not contain the
consequences it is sought to ascribe to it. It seems to me it should
be split up into two propositions of very unequal value: 1, the mind
and body are heterogeneous; 2, by virtue of this heterogeneity it is
not possible to understand any direct relation between the two.

Now, if the first proposition is absolutely correct, in the sense that
consciousness and matter are heterogeneous, the second proposition
seems to us directly contrary to the facts, which show us that the
phenomena of consciousness are incomplete phenomena. The consciousness
is not sufficient for itself; as we have said, it cannot exist by
itself. This again, if you like, is an axiom, or rather it is a fact
shown by observation and confirmed by reflection. Mind and matter
brought down to the essential, to the consciousness and its object,
form a natural whole, and the difficulty does not consist in uniting
but in separating them. Consider the following fact: "I experience a
sensation, and I have consciousness of it." This is the coupling of
two things--a sensation and a cognition.

The two elements, if we insist upon it, are heterogeneous, and they
differ qualitatively; but notwithstanding the existing prejudice by
reason of which no direct relation, no commerce, can be admitted
between heterogeneous facts, the alliance of the consciousness and the
sensation is the natural and primitive fact. They can only be
separated by analysis, and a scrupulous mind might even ask whether
one has the right to separate them. I have a sensation, and I have
consciousness of it. If not two facts, they are one and the same. Now,
sensation is matter and my consciousness is mind. If I am judging an
assortment of stuffs, this assortment, or the sensation I have of
them, is a particle of matter, a material state, and my judgment on
this sensation is the psychical phenomenon. We can neither believe,
nor desire, nor do any act of our intelligence without realising this
welding together of mind and matter. They are as inseparable as motion
and the object that moves; and this comparison, though far-fetched, is
really very convenient. Motion cannot exist without a mobile object;
and an object, on the other hand, can exist without movement. In the
same way, sensation may exist without the consciousness; but the
converse proposition, consciousness without sensation, without an
object, an empty consciousness or a "pure thought," cannot be
understood.

Let us mark clearly how this union is put forward by us. We describe
it after nature. It is observation which reveals to us the union and
the fusion of the two terms into one. Or, rather, we do not even
perceive their union until the moment when, by a process of analysis,
we succeed in convincing ourselves that that which we at first
considered single is really double, or, if you like, can be made into
two by the reason, without being so in reality. Thus it happens that
we bring this big problem in metaphysics on to the field of
observation.

Our solution vaguely resembles that which has sometimes been presented
under the ancient name of _physical influx_, or under the more modern
name of _inter-actionism_. There are many authors who maintain that
the soul can act directly on the body and modify it, and this is what
is called inter-actionism. Thereby is understood, if I mistake not, an
action from cause to effect, produced between two terms which enjoy a
certain independence with regard to each other. This interpretation is
indubitably close to ours, though not to be confused with it. My
personal interpretation sets aside the idea of all independence of the
mind, since it attributes to the mind an incomplete and, as it were, a
virtual existence.

If we had to seek paternity for ideas I would much rather turn to
Aristotle. It was not without some surprise that I was able to
convince myself that the above theory of the relations between the
soul and the body is to be found almost in its entirety in the great
philosopher. It is true that it is mixed up with many accessory ideas
which are out of date and which we now reject; but the essential of
the theory is there very clearly formulated, and that is the important
point. A few details on this subject will not be out of place. I give
them, not from the original source, which I am not erudite enough to
consult direct, but from the learned treatise which Bain has published
on the psychology of Aristotle, as an appendix to his work on the
Senses and the Intelligence.

The whole metaphysics of Aristotle is dominated by the distinction
between form and matter. This distinction is borrowed from the most
familiar fact in the sensible world--the form of solid objects. We may
name a substance without troubling ourselves as to the form it
possesses, and we may name the form without regard to the substance
that it clothes. But this distinction is a purely abstract one, for
there can be no real separation of form from matter, no form without
matter, and no matter without form. The two terms are correlative;
each one implies the other, and neither can be realised or actualised
without the other. Every individual substance can be considered from a
triple point of view: 1st, form; 2nd, matter; and 3rd, the compound or
aggregate of form and matter, the inseparable _Ens_, which transports
us out of the domain of logic and abstraction into that of reality.

Aristotle recognises between these two logical correlatives a
difference in rank. Form is superior, nobler, the higher in dignity,
nearer to the perfect entity; matter is inferior, more modest, more
distant from perfection. On account of its hierarchical inferiority,
matter is often presented as the second, or _correlatum_, and form as
the first, or _relatum_. This difference in rank is so strongly
marked, that these two correlations are likewise conceived in a
different form--that of the potential and the actual. Matter is the
potential, imperfect, roughly outlined element which is not yet
actual, and may perhaps never become so. Form is the actual, the
energy, the entelechy which actualises the potential and determines
the final compound.

These few definitions will make clear the singularly ingenious idea of
Aristotle on the nature of the body, the soul, and of their union. The
body is matter which is only intelligible as the _correlatum_ of form;
it can neither exist by itself nor be known by itself--that is to say,
when considered outside this relation. The soul is form, the actual.
By uniting with the body it constitutes the living subject. The soul
is the _relatum_, and is unintelligible and void of sense without its
_correlatum_. "The soul," says Aristotle, "is not a variety of body,
but it could not exist without a body: the soul is not a body, but
something which belongs or is relative to a body." The animated
subject is a form plunged and engaged in matter, and all its actions
and passions are so likewise. Each has its formal side which concerns
the soul, and its material side which concerns the body. The emotion
which belongs to the animated subject or aggregate of soul and body is
a complex fact having two aspects logically distinguishable from each
other, each of which is correlative to the other and implies it. It is
thus not only with our passions, but also with our perceptions, our
imaginations, reminiscences, reasonings, and efforts of attention to
learn. Intelligence, like emotion, is a phenomenon not simply of the
corporeal organism nor of the [Greek: Nous] only, but of the
commonalty or association of which they are members, and when the
intelligence weakens it is not because the [Greek: Nous] is altered,
but because the association is destroyed by the ruin of the corporeal
organism.

These few notes, which I have taken in their integrity from Bain's
text, allow us thoroughly to comprehend the thought of Aristotle, and
it seems to me that the Greek philosopher, by making of the soul and
body two correlative terms, has formed a comparison of great
exactness. I also much admire his idea according to which it is
through the union of the body and soul that the whole, which till then
was only possible, goes forth from the domain of logic and becomes
actual. The soul actualises the body, and becomes, as he said, its
entelechy.

These views are too close to those I have myself just set forth for it
to be necessary to dwell on their resemblance. The latter would become
still stronger if we separated from the thought of Aristotle a few
developments which are not essential, though he allowed them great
importance: I refer to the continual comparison he makes with the form
and matter of corporeal objects. Happy though it may be, this
comparison is but a metaphor which perhaps facilitates the
understanding of Aristotle's idea, but is not essential to his theory.
For my part, I attach far greater importance to the character of
_relatum_, and _correlatum_ ascribed to the two terms mind and matter,
and to the actualisation[42] produced by their union.

Let me add another point of comparison. Aristotle's theory recalls in
a striking manner that of Kant on the _a priori_ forms of thought. The
form of thought, or the category, is nothing without the matter of
cognition, and the latter is nothing without the application of form.
"Thoughts without content given by sensation are empty; intuitions
without concept furnished by the understanding are blind." There is
nothing astonishing in finding here the same illustration, since there
is throughout a question of describing the same phenomenon,--the
relation of mind to matter.

There remains to us to review the principal types of metaphysical
systems. We shall discuss these by taking as our guide the principle
we have just evolved, and which may be thus formulated: _The phenomena
of consciousness constitute an incomplete mode of existence._

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 40: See [Note 1] on p. 3.]

[Footnote 41: For reference, see [Note 18] on p. 73.--ED.]

[Footnote 42: _i.e._ rendering actual.--ED.]



