

I

THE SEXUAL ABERRATIONS[1]


The fact of sexual need in man and animal is expressed in biology by the
assumption of a "sexual impulse." This impulse is made analogous to the
impulse of taking nourishment, and to hunger. The sexual expression
corresponding to hunger not being found colloquilly, science uses the
expression "libido."[2]

Popular conception makes definite assumptions concerning the nature and
qualities of this sexual impulse. It is supposed to be absent during
childhood and to commence about the time of and in connection with the
maturing process of puberty; it is supposed that it manifests itself in
irresistible attractions exerted by one sex upon the other, and that its
aim is sexual union or at least such actions as would lead to union.

But we have every reason to see in these assumptions a very
untrustworthy picture of reality. On closer examination they are found
to abound in errors, inaccuracies and hasty conclusions.

If we introduce two terms and call the person from whom the sexual
attraction emanates the _sexual object_, and the action towards which
the impulse strives the _sexual aim_, then the scientifically examined
experience shows us many deviations in reference to both sexual object
and sexual aim, the relations of which to the accepted standard require
thorough investigation.


1. DEVIATION IN REFERENCE TO THE SEXUAL OBJECT

The popular theory of the sexual impulse corresponds closely to the
poetic fable of dividing the person into two halves--man and woman--who
strive to become reunited through love. It is therefore very surprising
to hear that there are men for whom the sexual object is not woman but
man, and that there are women for whom it is not man but woman. Such
_persons_ are called contrary sexuals, or better, inverts; the
_condition_, that of inversion. The number of such individuals is
considerable though difficult of accurate determination.[3]


A. _Inversion_

*The Behavior of Inverts.*--The above-mentioned persons behave in many
ways quite differently.

(_a_) They are absolutely inverted; _i.e._, their sexual object must be
always of the same sex, while the opposite sex can never be to them an
object of sexual longing, but leaves them indifferent or may even evoke
sexual repugnance. As men they are unable, on account of this
repugnance, to perform the normal sexual act or miss all pleasure in its
performance.

(_b_) They are amphigenously inverted (psychosexually hermaphroditic);
_i.e._, their sexual object may belong indifferently to either the same
or to the other sex. The inversion lacks the character of exclusiveness.

(_c_) They are occasionally inverted; _i.e._, under certain external
conditions, chief among which are the inaccessibility of the normal
sexual object and initiation, they are able to take as the sexual
object a person of the same sex and thus find sexual gratification.

The inverted also manifest a manifold behavior in their judgment about
the peculiarities of their sexual impulse. Some take the inversion as a
matter of course, just as the normal person does regarding his libido,
firmly demanding the same rights as the normal. Others, however, strive
against the fact of their inversion and perceive in it a morbid
compulsion.[4]

Other variations concern the relations of time. The characteristics of
the inversion in any individual may date back as far as his memory goes,
or they may become manifest to him at a definite period before or after
puberty.[5] The character is either retained throughout life, or it
occasionally recedes or represents an episode on the road to normal
development. A periodical fluctuation between the normal and the
inverted sexual object has also been observed. Of special interest are
those cases in which the libido changes, taking on the character of
inversion after a painful experience with the normal sexual object.

These different categories of variation generally exist independently of
one another. In the most extreme cases it can regularly be assumed that
the inversion has existed at all times and that the person feels
contented with his peculiar state.

Many authors will hesitate to gather into a unit all the cases
enumerated here and will prefer to emphasize the differences rather than
the common characters of these groups, a view which corresponds with
their preferred judgment of inversions. But no matter what divisions may
be set up, it cannot be overlooked that all transitions are abundantly
met with, so that the formation of a series would seem to impose itself.

*Conception of Inversion.*--The first attention bestowed upon inversion
gave rise to the conception that it was a congenital sign of nervous
degeneration. This harmonized with the fact that doctors first met it
among the nervous, or among persons giving such an impression. There are
two elements which should be considered independently in this
conception: the congenitality, and the degeneration.

*Degeneration.*--This term _degeneration_ is open to the objections
which may be urged against the promiscuous use of this word in general.
It has in fact become customary to designate all morbid manifestations
not of traumatic or infectious origin as degenerative. Indeed, Magnan's
classification of degenerates makes it possible that the highest general
configuration of nervous accomplishment need not exclude the application
of the concept of degeneration. Under the circumstances, it is a
question what use and what new content the judgment of "degeneration"
still possesses. It would seem more appropriate not to speak of
degeneration: (1) Where there are not many marked deviations from the
normal; (2) where the capacity for working and living do not in general
appear markedly impaired.[6]

That the inverted are not degenerates in this qualified sense can be
seen from the following facts:

1. The inversion is found among persons who otherwise show no marked
deviation from the normal.

2. It is found also among persons whose capabilities are not disturbed,
who on the contrary are distinguished by especially high intellectual
development and ethical culture.[7]

3. If one disregards the patients of one's own practice and strives to
comprehend a wider field of experience, he will in two directions
encounter facts which will prevent him from assuming inversions as a
degenerative sign.

(_a_) It must be considered that inversion was a frequent manifestation
among the ancient nations at the height of their culture. It was an
institution endowed with important functions. (_b_) It is found to be
unusually prevalent among savages and primitive races, whereas the term
degeneration is generally limited to higher civilization (I. Bloch).
Even among the most civilized nations of Europe, climate and race have a
most powerful influence on the distribution of, and attitude toward,
inversion.[8]

*Innateness.*--Only for the first and most extreme class of inverts, as
can be imagined, has innateness been claimed, and this from their own
assurance that at no time in their life has their sexual impulse
followed a different course. The fact of the existence of two other
classes, especially of the third, is difficult to reconcile with the
assumption of its being congenital. Hence, the propensity of those
holding this view to separate the group of absolute inverts from the
others results in the abandonment of the general conception of
inversion. Accordingly in a number of cases the inversion would be of a
congenital character, while in others it might originate from other
causes.

In contradistinction to this conception is that which assumes inversion
to be an _acquired_ character of the sexual impulse. It is based on the
following facts. (1) In many inverts (even absolute ones) an early
affective sexual impression can be demonstrated, as a result of which
the homosexual inclination developed. (2) In many others outer
influences of a promoting and inhibiting nature can be demonstrated,
which in earlier or later life led to a fixation of the inversion--among
which are exclusive relations with the same sex, companionship in war,
detention in prison, dangers of hetero-sexual intercourse, celibacy,
sexual weakness, etc. (3) Hypnotic suggestion may remove the inversion,
which would be surprising in that of a congenital character.

In view of all this, the existence of congenital inversion can certainly
be questioned. The objection may be made to it that a more accurate
examination of those claimed to be congenitally inverted will probably
show that the direction of the libido was determined by a definite
experience of early childhood, which has not been retained in the
conscious memory of the person, but which can be brought back to memory
by proper influences (Havelock Ellis). According to that author
inversion can be designated only as a frequent variation of the sexual
impulse which may be determined by a number of external circumstances of
life.

The apparent certainty thus reached is, however, overthrown by the
retort that manifestly there are many persons who have experienced even
in their early youth those very sexual influences, such as seduction,
mutual onanism, without becoming inverts, or without constantly
remaining so. Hence, one is forced to assume that the alternatives
congenital and acquired are either incomplete or do not cover the
circumstances present in inversions.

*Explanation of Inversion.*--The nature of inversion is explained
neither by the assumption that it is congenital nor that it is acquired.
In the first case, we need to be told what there is in it of the
congenital, unless we are satisfied with the roughest explanation,
namely, that a person brings along a congenital sexual impulse connected
with a definite sexual object. In the second case it is a question
whether the manifold accidental influences suffice to explain the
acquisition unless there is something in the individual to meet them
half way. The negation of this last factor is inadmissible according to
our former conclusions.

*The Relation of Bisexuality.*--Since the time of Frank Lydston,
Kiernan, and Chevalier, a new series of ideas has been introduced for
the explanation of the possibility of sexual inversion. This contains a
new contradiction to the popular belief which assumes that a human being
is either a man or a woman. Science shows cases in which the sexual
characteristics appear blurred and thus the sexual distinction is made
difficult, especially on an anatomical basis. The genitals of such
persons unite the male and female characteristics (hermaphroditism). In
rare cases both parts of the sexual apparatus are well developed (true
hermaphroditism), but usually both are stunted.[9]

The importance of these abnormalities lies in the fact that they
unexpectedly facilitate the understanding of the normal formation. A
certain degree of anatomical hermaphroditism really belongs to the
normal. In no normally formed male or female are traces of the apparatus
of the other sex lacking; these either continue functionless as
rudimentary organs, or they are transformed for the purpose of assuming
other functions.

The conception which we gather from this long known anatomical fact is
the original predisposition to bisexuality, which in the course of
development has changed to monosexuality, leaving slight remnants of the
stunted sex.

It was natural to transfer this conception to the psychic sphere and to
conceive the inversion in its aberrations as an expression of psychic
hermaphroditism. In order to bring the question to a decision, it was
only necessary to have one other circumstance, viz., a regular
concurrence of the inversion with the psychic and somatic signs of
hermaphroditism.

But this second expectation was not realized. The relations between the
assumed psychical and the demonstrable anatomical androgyny should never
be conceived as being so close. There is frequently found in the
inverted a diminution of the sexual impulse (H. Ellis) and a slight
anatomical stunting of the organs. This, however, is found frequently
but by no means regularly or preponderately. Thus we must recognize that
inversion and somatic hermaphroditism are totally independent of each
other.

Great importance has also been attached to the so-called secondary and
tertiary sex characters and their aggregate occurrence in the inverted
has been emphasized (H. Ellis). There is much truth in this but it
should not be forgotten that the secondary and tertiary sex
characteristics very frequently manifest themselves in the other sex,
thus indicating androgyny without, however, involving changes in the
sexual object in the sense of an inversion.

Psychic hermaphroditism would gain in substantiality if parallel with
the inversion of the sexual object there should be at least a change in
the other psychic qualities, such as in the impulses and distinguishing
traits characteristic of the other sex. But such inversion of character
can be expected with some regularity only in inverted women; in men the
most perfect psychic manliness may be united with the inversion. If one
firmly adheres to the hypothesis of a psychic hermaphroditism, one must
add that in certain spheres its manifestations allow the recognition of
only a very slight contrary determination. The same also holds true in
the somatic androgyny. According to Halban, the appearance of individual
stunted organs and secondary sex characters are quite independent of
each other.[10]

A spokesman of the masculine inverts stated the bisexual theory in its
crudest form in the following words: "It is a female brain in a male
body." But we do not know the characteristics of a "female brain." The
substitution of the anatomical for the psychological is as frivolous as
it is unjustified. The tentative explanation by v. Krafft-Ebing seems to
be more precisely formulated than that of Ulrich but does not
essentially differ from it. v. Krafft-Ebing thinks that the bisexual
predisposition gives to the individual male and female brain centers as
well as somatic sexual organs. These centers develop first towards
puberty mostly under the influence of the independent sex glands. We
can, however, say the same of the male and female "centers" as of the
male and female brains; and, moreover, we do not even know whether we
can assume for the sexual functions separate brain locations ("centers")
such as we may assume for language.

After this discussion, two notions, at all events, persist; first, that
a bisexual predisposition is to be presumed for the inversion also, only
we do not know of what it consists beyond the anatomical formations;
and, second, that we are dealing with disturbances which are experienced
by the sexual impulse during its development.[11]

*The Sexual Object of Inverts.*--The theory of psychic hermaphroditism
presupposed that the sexual object of the inverted is the reverse of the
normal. The inverted man, like the woman, succumbs to the charms
emanating from manly qualities of body and mind; he feels himself like a
woman and seeks a man.

But however true this may be for a great number of inverts, it by no
means indicates the general character of inversion. There is no doubt
that a great part of the male inverted have retained the psychic
character of virility, that proportionately they show but little of the
secondary characters of the other sex, and that they really look for
real feminine psychic features in their sexual object. If that were not
so it would be incomprehensible why masculine prostitution, in offering
itself to inverts, copies in all its exterior, to-day as in antiquity,
the dress and attitudes of woman. This imitation would otherwise be an
insult to the ideal of the inverts. Among the Greeks, where the most
manly men were found among inverts, it is quite obvious that it was not
the masculine character of the boy which kindled the love of man, but it
was his physical resemblance to woman as well as his feminine psychic
qualities, such as shyness, demureness, and the need of instruction and
help. As soon as the boy himself became a man he ceased to be a sexual
object for men and in turn became a lover of boys. The sexual object in
this case as in many others is therefore not of the like sex, but it
unites both sex characters, a compromise between the impulses striving
for the man and for the woman, but firmly conditioned by the masculinity
of body (the genitals).[12]

The conditions in the woman are more definite; here the active inverts,
with special frequency, show the somatic and psychic characters of man
and desire femininity in their sexual object; though even here greater
variation will be found on more intimate investigation.

*The Sexual Aim of Inverts.*--The important fact to bear in mind is that
no uniformity of the sexual aim can be attributed to inversion.
Intercourse per anum in men by no means goes with inversion;
masturbation is just as frequently the exclusive aim; and the limitation
of the sexual aim to mere effusion of feelings is here even more
frequent than in hetero-sexual love. In women, too, the sexual aims of
the inverted are manifold, among which contact with the mucous membrane
of the mouth seems to be preferred.

*Conclusion.*--Though from the material on hand we are by no means in a
position satisfactorily to explain the origin of inversion, we can say
that through this investigation we have obtained an insight which can
become of greater significance to us than the solution of the above
problem. Our attention is called to the fact that we have assumed a too
close connection between the sexual impulse and the sexual object. The
experience gained from the so called abnormal cases teaches us that a
connection exists between the sexual impulse and the sexual object which
we are in danger of overlooking in the uniformity of normal states where
the impulse seems to bring with it the object. We are thus instructed to
separate this connection between the impulse and the object. The sexual
impulse is probably entirely independent of its object and is not
originated by the stimuli proceeding from the object.


B. _The Sexually Immature and Animals as Sexual Objects_

Whereas those sexual inverts whose sexual object does not belong to the
normally adapted sex, appear to the observer as a collective number of
perhaps otherwise normal individuals, the persons who choose for their
sexual object the sexually immature (children) are apparently from the
first sporadic aberrations. Only exceptionally are children the
exclusive sexual objects. They are mostly drawn into this role by a
faint-hearted and impotent individual who makes use of such substitutes,
or when an impulsive urgent desire cannot at the time secure the proper
object. Still it throws some light on the nature of the sexual impulse,
that it should suffer such great variation and depreciation of its
object, a thing which hunger, adhering more energetically to its object,
would allow only in the most extreme cases. The same may be said of
sexual relations with animals--a thing not at all rare among
farmers--where the sexual attraction goes beyond the limits of the
species.

For esthetic reasons one would fain attribute this and other excessive
aberrations of the sexual impulse to the insane, but this cannot be
done. Experience teaches that among the latter no disturbances of the
sexual impulse can be found other than those observed among the sane, or
among whole races and classes. Thus we find with gruesome frequency
sexual abuse of children by teachers and servants merely because they
have the best opportunities for it. The insane present the aforesaid
aberration only in a somewhat intensified form; or what is of special
significance is the fact that the aberration becomes exclusive and takes
the place of the normal sexual gratification.

This very remarkable relation of sexual variations ranging from the
normal to the insane gives material for reflection. It seems to me that
the fact to be explained would show that the impulses of the sexual life
belong to those which even normally are most poorly controlled by the
higher psychic activities. He who is in any way psychically abnormal, be
it in social or ethical conditions, is, according to my experience,
regularly so in his sexual life. But many are abnormal in their sexual
life who in every other respect correspond to the average; they have
followed the human cultural development, but sexuality remained as their
weak point.

As a general result of these discussions we come to see that, under
numerous conditions and among a surprising number of individuals, the
nature and value of the sexual object steps into the background. There
is something else in the sexual impulse which is the essential and
constant.[13]


2. DEVIATION IN REFERENCE TO THE SEXUAL AIM

The union of the genitals in the characteristic act of copulation is
taken as the normal sexual aim. It serves to loosen the sexual tension
and temporarily to quench the sexual desire (gratification analogous to
satisfaction of hunger). Yet even in the most normal sexual process
those additions are distinguishable, the development of which leads to
the aberrations described as _perversions_. Thus certain intermediary
relations to the sexual object connected with copulation, such as
touching and looking, are recognized as preliminary to the sexual aim.
These activities are on the one hand themselves connected with pleasure
and on the other hand they enhance the excitement which persists until
the definite sexual aim is reached. One definite kind of contiguity,
consisting of mutual approximation of the mucous membranes of the lips
in the form of a kiss, has received among the most civilized nations a
sexual value, though the parts of the body concerned do not belong to
the sexual apparatus but form the entrance to the digestive tract. This
therefore supplies the factors which allow us to bring the perversions
into relation with the normal sexual life, and which are available also
for their classification. The perversions are either (_a_) anatomical
_transgressions_ of the bodily regions destined for sexual union, or (_b_)
a _lingering_ at the intermediary relations to the sexual object which
should normally be rapidly passed on the way to the definite sexual aim.


(_a_) _Anatomical Transgression_

*Overestimation of the Sexual Object.*--The psychic estimation in which
the sexual object as a goal of the sexual impulse shares is only in the
rarest cases limited to the genitals; generally it embraces the whole
body and tends to include all sensations emanating from the sexual
object. The same overestimation spreads over the psychic sphere and
manifests itself as a logical blinding (diminished judgment) in the face
of the psychic attainments and perfections of the sexual object, as well
as a blind obedience to the judgments issuing from the latter. The full
faith of love thus becomes an important, if not the primordial source of
authority.[14]

It is this sexual overvaluation, which so ill agrees with the
restriction of the sexual aim to the union of the genitals only, that
assists other parts of the body to participate as sexual aims.[15] In
the development of this most manifold anatomical overestimation there is
an unmistakable desire towards variation, a thing denominated by Hoche
as "excitement-hunger" (Reiz-hunger).[16]

*Sexual Utilization of the Mucous Membrane of the Lips and Mouth.*--The
significance of the factor of sexual overestimation can be best studied
in the man, in whom alone the sexual life is accessible to
investigation, whereas in the woman it is veiled in impenetrable
darkness, partly in consequence of cultural stunting and partly on
account of the conventional reticence and dishonesty of women.

The employment of the mouth as a sexual organ is considered as a
perversion if the lips (tongue) of the one are brought into contact with
the genitals of the other, but not when the mucous membrane of the lips
of both touch each other. In the latter exception we find the connection
with the normal. He who abhors the former as perversions, though these
since antiquity have been common practices among mankind, yields to a
distinct _feeling of loathing_ which protects him from adopting such
sexual aims. The limit of such loathing is frequently purely
conventional; he who kisses fervently the lips of a pretty girl will
perhaps be able to use her tooth brush only with a sense of loathing,
though there is no reason to assume that his own oral cavity for which
he entertains no loathing is cleaner than that of the girl. Our
attention is here called to the factor of loathing which stands in the
way of the libidinous overestimation of the sexual aim, but which may
in turn be vanquished by the libido. In the loathing we may observe one
of the forces which have brought about the restrictions of the sexual
aim. As a rule these forces halt at the genitals; there is, however, no
doubt that even the genitals of the other sex themselves may be an
object of loathing. Such behavior is characteristic of all hysterics,
especially women. The force of the sexual impulse prefers to occupy
itself with the overcoming of this loathing (see below).

*Sexual Utilization of the Anal Opening.*--It is even more obvious than
in the former case that it is the loathing which stamps as a perversion
the use of the anus as a sexual aim. But it should not be interpreted as
espousing a cause when I observe that the basis of this
loathing--namely, that this part of the body serves for the excretion
and comes in contact with the loathsome excrement--is not more plausible
than the basis which hysterical girls have for the disgust which they
entertain for the male genital because it serves for urination.

The sexual role of the mucous membrane of the anus is by no means
limited to intercourse between men; its preference has nothing
characteristic of the inverted feeling. On the contrary, it seems that
the _pedicatio_ of the man owes its role to the analogy with the act in
the woman, whereas among inverts it is mutual masturbation which is the
most common sexual aim.

*The Significance of Other Parts of the Body.*--Sexual infringement on
the other parts of the body, in all its variations, offers nothing new;
it adds nothing to our knowledge of the sexual impulse which herein only
announces its intention to dominate the sexual object in every way.
Besides the sexual overvaluation, a second and generally unknown factor
may be mentioned among the anatomical transgressions. Certain parts of
the body, like the mucous membrane of the mouth and anus, which
repeatedly appear in such practices, lay claim as it were to be
considered and treated as genitals. We shall hear how this claim is
justified by the development of the sexual impulse, and how it is
fulfilled in the symptomatology of certain morbid conditions.

*Unfit Substitutes for the Sexual Object. Fetichism.*--We are especially
impressed by those cases in which for the normal sexual object another
is substituted which is related to it but which is totally unfit for the
normal sexual aim. According to the scheme of the introduction we should
have done better to mention this most interesting group of aberrations
of the sexual impulse among the deviations in reference to the sexual
object, but we have deferred mention of these until we became acquainted
with the factor of sexual overestimation, upon which these
manifestations, connected with the relinquishing of the sexual aim,
depend.

The substitute for the sexual object is generally a part of the body but
little adapted for sexual purposes, such as the foot, or hair, or an
inanimate object which is in demonstrable relation with the sexual
person, and preferably with the sexuality of the same (fragments of
clothing, white underwear). This substitution is not unjustly compared
with the fetich in which the savage sees the embodiment of his god.

The transition to the cases of fetichism, with a renunciation of a
normal or of a perverted sexual aim, is formed by cases in which a
fetichistic determination is demanded in the sexual object if the sexual
aim is to be attained (definite color of hair, clothing, even physical
blemishes). No other variation of the sexual impulse verging on the
pathological claims our interest as much as this one, owing to the
peculiarity occasioned by its manifestations. A certain diminution in
the striving for the normal sexual aim may be presupposed in all these
cases (executive weakness of the sexual apparatus).[17] The connection
with the normal is occasioned by the psychologically necessary
overestimation of the sexual object, which inevitably encroaches upon
everything associatively related to it (sexual object). A certain degree
of such fetichism therefore regularly belong to the normal, especially
during those stages of wooing when the normal sexual aim seems
inaccessible or its realization deferred.

     "Get me a handkerchief from her bosom--a garter of my love."
                                                        --FAUST.

The case becomes pathological only when the striving for the fetich
fixes itself beyond such determinations and takes the place of the
normal sexual aim; or again, when the fetich disengages itself from the
person concerned and itself becomes a sexual object. These are the
general determinations for the transition of mere variations of the
sexual impulse into pathological aberrations.

The persistent influence of a sexual impress mostly received in early
childhood often shows itself in the selection of a fetich, as Binet
first asserted, and as was later proven by many illustrations,--a thing
which may be placed parallel to the proverbial attachment to a first
love in the normal ("On revient toujours a ses premiers amours"). Such a
connection is especially seen in cases with only fetichistic
determinations of the sexual object. The significance of early sexual
impressions will be met again in other places.

In other cases it was mostly a symbolic thought association, unconscious
to the person concerned, which led to the replacing of the object by
means of a fetich. The paths of these connections can not always be
definitely demonstrated. The foot is a very primitive sexual symbol
already found in myths.[18] Fur is used as a fetich probably on account
of its association with the hairiness of the mons veneris. Such
symbolism seems often to depend on sexual experiences in childhood.[19]


(_b_) _Fixation of Precursory Sexual Aims_

*The Appearance of New Intentions.*--All the outer and inner
determinations which impede or hold at a distance the attainment of the
normal sexual aim, such as impotence, costliness of the sexual object,
and dangers of the sexual act, will conceivably strengthen the
inclination to linger at the preparatory acts and to form them into new
sexual aims which may take the place of the normal. On closer
investigation it is always seen that the ostensibly most peculiar of
these new intentions have already been indicated in the normal sexual
act.

*Touching and Looking.*--At least a certain amount of touching is
indispensable for a person in order to attain the normal sexual aim. It
is also generally known that the touching of the skin of the sexual
object causes much pleasure and produces a supply of new excitement.
Hence, the lingering at the touching can hardly be considered a
perversion if the sexual act is proceeded with.

The same holds true in the end with looking which is analogous to
touching. The manner in which the libidinous excitement is frequently
awakened is by the optical impression, and selection takes account of
this circumstance--if this teleological mode of thinking be
permitted--by making the sexual object a thing of beauty. The covering
of the body, which keeps abreast with civilization, serves to arouse
sexual inquisitiveness, which always strives to restore for itself the
sexual object by uncovering the hidden parts. This can be turned into
the artistic ("sublimation") if the interest is turned from the genitals
to the form of the body.[20] The tendency to linger at this intermediary
sexual aim of the sexually accentuated looking is found to a certain
degree in most normals; indeed it gives them the possibility of
directing a certain amount of their libido to a higher artistic aim. On
the other hand, the fondness for looking becomes a perversion (_a_) when
it limits itself entirely to the genitals; (_b_) when it becomes connected
with the overcoming of loathing (voyeurs and onlookers at the functions
of excretion); and (_c_) when instead of preparing for the normal sexual
aim it suppresses it. The latter, if I may draw conclusions from a
single analysis, is in a most pronounced way true of exhibitionists, who
expose their genitals so as in turn to bring to view the genitals of
others.

In the perversion which consists in striving to look and be looked at we
are confronted with a very remarkable character which will occupy us
even more intensively in the following aberration. The sexual aim is
here present in twofold formation, in an _active_ and a _passive_ form.

The force which is opposed to the peeping mania and through which it is
eventually abolished is _shame_ (like the former loathing).

*Sadism and Masochism.*--The desire to cause pain to the sexual object
and its opposite, the most frequent and most significant of all
perversions, was designated in its two forms by v. Krafft-Ebing as
sadism or the active form, and masochism or the passive form. Other
authors prefer the narrower term algolagnia which emphasizes the
pleasure in pain and cruelty, whereas the terms selected by v.
Krafft-Ebing place the pleasure secured in all kinds of humility and
submission in the foreground.

The roots of active algolagnia, sadism, can be readily demonstrable in
the normal. The sexuality of most men shows a taint of _aggression_, it
is a propensity to subdue, the biological significance of which lies in
the necessity of overcoming the resistance of the sexual object by
actions other than mere _courting_. Sadism would then correspond to an
aggressive component of the sexual impulse which has become independent
and exaggerated and has been brought to the foreground by displacement.

The conception of sadism fluctuates in the usage of language from a mere
active or impetuous attitude towards the sexual object to the exclusive
attachment of the gratification to the subjection and maltreatment of
the object. Strictly speaking only the last extreme case has a claim to
the name of perversion.

Similarly, the designation of masochism comprises all passive attitude
to the sexual life and to the sexual object; in its most extreme form
the gratification is connected with suffering of physical or mental pain
at the hands of the sexual object. Masochism as a perversion seems to be
still more remote from the normal sexual life by forming a contrast to
it; it may be doubted whether it ever appears as a primary form or
whether it does not more regularly originate through transformation from
sadism. It can often be recognized that the masochism is nothing but a
continuation of the sadism turning against one's own person in which the
latter at first takes the place of the sexual object. Analysis of
extreme cases of masochistic perversions show that there is a
cooeperation of a large series of factors which exaggerate and fix the
original passive sexual attitude (castration complex, conscience).

The pain which is here overcome ranks with the loathing and shame which
were the resistances opposed to the libido.

Sadism and masochism occupy a special place among the perversions, for
the contrast of activity and passivity lying at their bases belong to
the common traits of the sexual life.

That cruelty and sexual impulse are most intimately connected is beyond
doubt taught by the history of civilization, but in the explanation of
this connection no one has gone beyond the accentuation of the
aggressive factors of the libido. The aggression which is mixed with the
sexual impulse is according to some authors a remnant of cannibalistic
lust, a participation on the part of the domination apparatus
(Bemaechtigungsapparatus), which served also for the gratification of the
great wants of the other, ontogenetically the older impulse.[21] It has
also been claimed that every pain contains in itself the possibility of
a pleasurable sensation. Let us be satisfied with the impression that
the explanation of this perversion is by no means satisfactory and that
it is possible that many psychic efforts unite themselves into one
effect.

The most striking peculiarity of this perversion lies in the fact that
its active and passive forms are regularly encountered together in the
same person. He who experiences pleasure by causing pain to others in
sexual relations is also able to experience the pain emanating from
sexual relations as pleasure. A sadist is simultaneously a masochist,
though either the active or the passive side of the perversion may be
more strongly developed and thus represent his preponderate sexual
activity.[22]

We thus see that certain perverted propensities regularly appear in
_contrasting pairs_, a thing which, in view of the material to be
produced later, must claim great theoretical value. It is furthermore
clear that the existence of the contrast, sadism and masochism, can not
readily be attributed to the mixture of aggression. On the other hand
one may be tempted to connect such simultaneously existing contrasts
with the united contrast of male and female in bisexuality, the
significance of which is reduced in psychoanalysis to the contrast of
activity and passivity.


3. GENERAL STATEMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL PERVERSIONS

*Variation and Disease.*--The physicians who at first studied the
_perversions_ in pronounced cases and under peculiar conditions were
naturally inclined to attribute to them the character of a morbid or
degenerative sign similar to the _inversions_. This view, however, is
easier to refute in this than in the former case. Everyday experience
has shown that most of these transgressions, at least the milder ones,
are seldom wanting as components in the sexual life of normals who look
upon them as upon other intimacies. Wherever the conditions are
favorable such a perversion may for a long time be substituted by a
normal person for the normal sexual aim or it may be placed near it. In
no normal person does the normal sexual aim lack some designable
perverse element, and this universality suffices in itself to prove the
inexpediency of an opprobrious application of the name perversion. In
the realm of the sexual life one is sure to meet with exceptional
difficulties which are at present really unsolvable, if one wishes to
draw a sharp line between the mere variations within physiological
limits and morbid symptoms.

Nevertheless, the quality of the new sexual aim in some of these
perversions is such as to require special notice. Some of the
perversions are in content so distant from the normal that we cannot
help calling them "morbid," especially those in which the sexual
impulse, in overcoming the resistances (shame, loathing, fear, and pain)
has brought about surprising results (licking of feces and violation of
cadavers). Yet even in these cases one ought not to feel certain of
regularly finding among the perpetrators persons of pronounced
abnormalities or insane minds. We can not lose sight of the fact that
persons who otherwise behave normally are recorded as sick in the realm
of the sexual life where they are dominated by the most unbridled of all
impulses. On the other hand, a manifest abnormality in any other
relation in life generally shows an undercurrent of abnormal sexual
behavior.

In the majority of cases we are able to find the morbid character of the
perversion not in the content of the new sexual aim but in its relation
to the normal. It is morbid if the perversion does not appear beside the
normal (sexual aim and sexual object), where favorable circumstances
promote it and unfavorable impede the normal, or if it has under all
circumstances repressed and supplanted the normal; _the exclusiveness_
and _fixation_ of the perversion justifies us in considering it a morbid
symptom.

*The Psychic Participation in the Perversions.*--Perhaps it is precisely
in the most abominable perversions that we must recognize the most
prolific psychic participation for the transformation of the sexual
impulse. In these cases a piece of psychic work has been accomplished in
which, in spite of its gruesome success, the value of an idealization of
the impulse can not be disputed. The omnipotence of love nowhere perhaps
shows itself stronger than in this one of her aberrations. The highest
and the lowest everywhere in sexuality hang most intimately together.
("From heaven through the world to hell.")

*Two Results.*--In the study of perversions we have gained an insight
into the fact that the sexual impulse has to struggle against certain
psychic forces, resistances, among which shame and loathing are most
prominent. We may presume that these forces are employed to confine the
impulse within the accepted normal limits, and if they have become
developed in the individual before the sexual impulse has attained its
full strength, it is really they which have directed it in the course of
development.[23]

We have furthermore remarked that some of the examined perversions can
be comprehended only by assuming the union of many motives. If they are
amenable to analysis--disintegration--they must be of a composite
nature. This may give us a hint that the sexual impulse itself may not
be something simple, that it may on the contrary be composed of many
components which detach themselves to form perversions. Our clinical
observation thus calls our attention to _fusions_ which have lost their
expression in the uniform normal behavior.


4. THE SEXUAL IMPULSE IN NEUROTICS

*Psychoanalysis.*--A proper contribution to the knowledge of the sexual
impulse in persons who are at least related to the normal can be gained
only from one source, and is accessible only by one definite path. There
is only one way to obtain a thorough and unerring solution of problems
in the sexual life of so-called psychoneurotics (hysteria, obsessions,
the wrongly-named neurasthenia, and surely also dementia praecox, and
paranoia), and that is by subjecting them to the psychoanalytic
investigations propounded by J. Breuer and myself in 1893, which we
called the "cathartic" treatment.

I must repeat what I have said in my published work, that these
psychoneuroses, as far as my experience goes, are based on sexual motive
powers. I do not mean that the energy of the sexual impulse merely
contributes to the forces supporting the morbid manifestations
(symptoms), but I wish distinctly to maintain that this supplies the
only constant and the most important source of energy in the neurosis,
so that the sexual life of such persons manifests itself either
exclusively, preponderately, or partially in these symptoms. As I have
already stated in different places, the symptoms are the sexual
activities of the patient. The proof for this assertion I have obtained
from the psychoanalysis of hysterics and other neurotics during a period
of twenty years, the results of which I hope to give later in a detailed
account.

Psychoanalysis removes the symptoms of hysteria on the supposition that
they are the substitutes--the transcriptions as it were--for a series of
emotionally accentuated psychic processes, wishes, and desires, to which
a passage for their discharge through the conscious psychic activities
has been cut off by a special process (repression). These thought
formations which are restrained in the state of the unconscious strive
for expression, that is, for _discharge_, in conformity to their
affective value, and find such in hysteria through a process of
_conversion_ into somatic phenomena--the hysterical symptoms. If, _lege
artis_, and with the aid of a special technique, retrogressive
transformations of the symptoms into the affectful and conscious
thoughts can be effected, it then becomes possible to get the most
accurate information about the nature and origin of these previously
unconscious psychic formations.

*Results of Psychoanalysis.*--In this manner it has been discovered that
the symptoms represent the equivalent for the strivings which received
their strength from the source of the sexual impulse. This fully concurs
with what we know of the character of hysterics, which we have taken as
models for all psycho-neurotics, before they have become diseased, and
with what we know concerning the causes of the disease. The hysterical
character evinces a part of sexual repression which reaches beyond the
normal limits, an exaggeration of the resistances against the sexual
impulse which we know as shame and loathing. It is an instinctive flight
from intellectual occupation with the sexual problem, the consequence of
which in pronounced cases is a complete sexual ignorance, which is
preserved till the age of sexual maturity is attained.[24]

This feature, so characteristic of hysteria, is not seldom concealed in
crude observation by the existence of the second constitutional factor
of hysteria, namely, the enormous development of the sexual craving. But
the psychological analysis will always reveal it and solves the very
contradictory enigma of hysteria by proving the existence of the
contrasting pair, an immense sexual desire and a very exaggerated sexual
rejection.

The provocation of the disease in hysterically predisposed persons is
brought about if in consequence of their progressive maturity or
external conditions of life they are earnestly confronted with the real
sexual demand. Between the pressure of the craving and the opposition of
the sexual rejection an outlet for the disease results, which does not
remove the conflict but seeks to elude it by transforming the libidinous
strivings into symptoms. It is an exception only in appearance if a
hysterical person, say a man, becomes subject to some banal emotional
disturbance, to a conflict in the center of which there is no sexual
interest. Psychoanalysis will regularly show that it is the sexual
components of the conflict which make the disease possible by
withdrawing the psychic processes from normal adjustment.

*Neurosis and Perversion.*--A great part of the opposition to my
assertion is explained by the fact that the sexuality from which I
deduce the psychoneurotic symptoms is thought of as coincident with the
normal sexual impulse. But psychoanalysis teaches us better than this.
It shows that the symptoms do not by any means result at the expense
only of the so called normal sexual impulse (at least not exclusively or
preponderately), but they represent the converted expression of impulses
which in a broader sense might be designated as _perverse_ if they could
manifest themselves directly in phantasies and acts without deviating
from consciousness. The symptoms are therefore partially formed at the
cost of abnormal sexuality. _The neurosis is, so to say, the negative of
the perversion._[25]

The sexual impulse of the psychoneurotic shows all the aberrations which
we have studied as variations of the normal and as manifestations of
morbid sexual life.

(_a_) In all the neurotics without exception we find feelings of inversion
in the unconscious psychic life, fixation of libido on persons of the
same sex. It is impossible, without a deep and searching discussion,
adequately to appreciate the significance of this factor for the
formation of the picture of the disease; I can only assert that the
unconscious propensity to inversion is never wanting and is particularly
of immense service in explaining male hysteria.[26]

(_b_) All the inclinations to anatomical transgression can be demonstrated
in psychoneurotics in the unconscious and as symptom-creators. Of
special frequency and intensity are those which impart to the mouth and
the mucous membrane of the anus the role of genitals.

(_c_) The partial desires which usually appear in contrasting pairs play
a very prominent role among the symptom-creators in the psychoneuroses.
We have learned to know them as carriers of new sexual aims, such as
peeping mania, exhibitionism, and the actively and passively formed
impulses of cruelty. The contribution of the last is indispensable for
the understanding of the morbid nature of the symptoms; it almost
regularly controls some portion of the social behavior of the patient.
The transformation of love into hatred, of tenderness into hostility,
which is characteristic of a large number of neurotic cases and
apparently of all cases of paranoia, takes place by means of the union
of cruelty with the libido.

The interest in these deductions will be more heightened by certain
peculiarities of the diagnosis of facts.

Alpha. There is nothing in the unconscious streams of thought of
the neuroses which would correspond to an inclination towards fetichism;
a circumstance which throws light on the psychological peculiarity of
this well understood perversion.

Beta. Wherever any such impulse is found in the unconscious which
can be paired with a contrasting one, it can regularly be demonstrated
that the latter, too, is effective. Every active perversion is here
accompanied by its passive counterpart. He who in the unconscious is an
exhibitionist is at the same time a voyeur, he who suffers from sadistic
feelings as a result of repression will also show another reinforcement
of the symptoms from the source of masochistic tendencies. The perfect
concurrence with the behavior of the corresponding positive perversions
is certainly very noteworthy. In the picture of the disease, however,
the preponderant role is played by either one or the other of the
opposing tendencies.

Gamma. In a pronounced case of psychoneurosis we seldom find the
development of one single perverted impulse; usually there are many and
regularly there are traces of all perversions. The individual impulse,
however, on account of its intensity, is independent of the development
of the others, but the study of the positive perversions gives us the
accurate counterpart to it.


PARTIAL IMPULSES AND EROGENOUS ZONES

Keeping in mind what we have learned from the examination of the
positive and negative perversions, it becomes quite obvious that they
can be referred to a number of "partial impulses," which are not,
however, primary but are subject to further analysis. By an "impulse" we
can understand in the first place nothing but the psychic representative
of a continually flowing internal somatic source of excitement, in
contradistinction to the "stimulus" which is produced by isolated
excitements coming from without. The impulse is thus one of the concepts
marking the limits between the psychic and the physical. The simplest
and most obvious assumption concerning the nature of the impulses would
be that in themselves they possess no quality but are only taken into
account as a measure of the demand for effort in the psychic life. What
distinguishes the impulses from one another and furnishes them with
specific attributes is their relation to their somatic _sources_ and to
their _aims_. The source of the impulse is an exciting process in an
organ, and the immediate aim of the impulse lies in the elimination of
this organic stimulus.

Another preliminary assumption in the theory of the impulse which we
cannot relinquish, states that the bodily organs furnish two kinds of
excitements which are determined by differences of a chemical nature.
One of these forms of excitement we designate as the specifically sexual
and the concerned organ as the _erogenous zone_, while the sexual
element emanating from it is the partial impulse.[27]

In the perversions which claim sexual significance for the oral cavity
and the anal opening the part played by the erogenous zone is quite
obvious. It behaves in every way like a part of the sexual apparatus. In
hysteria these parts of the body, as well as the tracts of mucous
membrane proceeding from them, become the seat of new sensations and
innervating changes in a manner similar to the real genitals when under
the excitement of normal sexual processes.

The significance of the erogenous zones in the psychoneuroses, as
additional apparatus and substitutes for the genitals, appears to be
most prominent in hysteria though that does not signify that it is of
lesser validity in the other morbid forms. It is not so recognizable in
compulsion neurosis and paranoia because here the symptom formation
takes place in regions of the psychic apparatus which lie at a great
distance from the central locations for bodily control. The more
remarkable thing in the compulsion neurosis is the significance of the
impulses which create new sexual aims and appear independently of the
erogenous zones. Nevertheless, the eye corresponds to an erogenous zone
in the looking and exhibition mania, while the skin takes on the same
part in the pain and cruelty components of the sexual impulse. The skin,
which in special parts of the body becomes differentiated as sensory
organs and modified by the mucous membrane, is the erogenous zone,
[Greek: kat] ex ogen.[28]


EXPLANATION OF THE MANIFEST PREPONDERANCE OF SEXUAL PERVERSIONS IN THE
PSYCHONEUROSES

The sexuality of psychoneurotics has perhaps been placed in a false
light by the above discussions. It appears that the sexual behavior of
the psychoneurotic approaches in predisposition to the pervert and
deviates by just so much from the normal. Nevertheless, it is very
possible that the constitutional disposition of these patients besides
containing an immense amount of sexual repression and a predominant
force of sexual impulse also possesses an unusual tendency to
perversions in the broadest sense. However, an examination of milder
cases shows that the last assumption is not an absolute requisite, or at
least that in pronouncing judgment on the morbid effects one ought to
discount the effect of one of the factors. In most psychoneurotics the
disease first appears after puberty following the demands of the normal
sexual life. Against these the repression above all directs itself. Or
the disease comes on later, owing to the fact that the libido is unable
to attain normal sexual gratification. In both cases the libido behaves
like a stream the principal bed of which is dammed; it fills the
collateral roads which until now perhaps have been empty. Thus the
manifestly great (though to be sure negative) tendency to perversion in
psychoneurotics may be collaterally conditioned; at any rate, it is
certainly collaterally increased. The fact of the matter is that the
sexual repression has to be added as an inner factor to such external
ones as restriction of freedom, inaccessibility to the normal sexual
object, dangers of the normal sexual act, etc., which cause the origin
of perversions in individuals who might have otherwise remained normal.

In individual cases of neurosis the behavior may be different; now the
congenital force of the tendency to perversion may be more decisive and
at other times more influence may be exerted by the collateral increase
of the same through the deviation of the libido from the normal sexual
aim and object. It would be unjust to construe a contrast where a
cooperation exists. The greatest results will always be brought about by
a neurosis if constitution and experience cooperate in the same
direction. A pronounced constitution may perhaps be able to dispense
with the assistance of daily impressions, while a profound disturbance
in life may perhaps bring on a neurosis even in an average constitution.
These views similarly hold true in the etiological significance
of the congenital and the accidental experiences in other spheres.

If, however, preference is given to the assumption that an especially
formed tendency to perversions is characteristic of the psychoneurotic
constitution, there is a prospect of being able to distinguish a
multiformity of such constitutions in accordance with the congenital
preponderance of this or that erogenous zone, or of this or that partial
impulse. Whether there is a special relationship between the
predisposition to perversions and the selection of the morbid picture
has not, like many other things in this realm, been investigated.


REFERENCE TO THE INFANTILISM OF SEXUALITY

By demonstrating the perverted feelings as symptomatic formations in
psychoneurotics, we have enormously increased the number of persons who
can be added to the perverts. This is not only because neurotics
represent a very large proportion of humanity, but we must consider also
that the neuroses in all their gradations run in an uninterrupted series
to the normal state. Moebius was quite justified in saying that we are
all somewhat hysterical. Hence, the very wide dissemination of
perversions urged us to assume that the predisposition to perversions is
no rare peculiarity but must form a part of the normally accepted
constitution.

We have heard that it is a question whether perversions should be
referred to congenital determinations or whether they originate from
accidental experiences, just as Binet showed in fetichisms. Now we are
forced to the conclusion that there is indeed something congenital at
the basis of perversions, but it is something _which is congenital in
all persons_, which as a predisposition may fluctuate in intensity and
is brought into prominence by influences of life. We deal here with
congenital roots in the constitution of the sexual impulse which in one
series of cases develop into real carriers of sexual activity
(perverts); while in other cases they undergo an insufficient
suppression (repression), so that as morbid symptoms they are enabled to
attract to themselves in a round-about way a considerable part of the
sexual energy; while again in favorable cases between the two extremes
they originate the normal sexual life through effective restrictions and
other elaborations.

But we must also remember that the assumed constitution which shows the
roots of all perversions will be demonstrable only in the child, though
all impulses can be manifested in it only in moderate intensity. If we
are led to suppose that neurotics conserve the infantile state of their
sexuality or return to it, our interest must then turn to the sexual
life of the child, and we will then follow the play of influences which
control the processes of development of the infantile sexuality up to
its termination in a perversion, a neurosis or a normal sexual life.

[1] The facts contained in the first "Contribution" have been gathered
from the familiar publications of Krafft-Ebing, Moll, Moebius, Havelock
Ellis, Schrenk-Notzing, Loewenfeld, Eulenberg, J. Bloch, and M.
Hirschfeld, and from the later works published in the "Jahrbuch fuer
sexuelle Zwischenstufen." As these publications also mention the other
literature bearing on this subject I may forbear giving detailed
references.

The conclusions reached through the investigation of sexual inverts are
all based on the reports of J. Sadger and on my own experience.

[2] For general use the word "libido" is best translated by "craving."
(Prof. James J. Putnam, Journal of Abnormal Psychology, Vol. IV, 6.)

[3] For the difficulties entailed in the attempt to ascertain the
proportional number of inverts compare the work of M. Hirschfeld in the
Jahrbuch fuer sexuelle Zwischenstufen, 1904. Cf. also Brill, The
Conception of Homosexuality, Journal of the A.M.A., August 2, 1913.

[4] Such a striving against the compulsion to inversion favors cures by
suggestion of psychoanalysis.

[5] Many have justly emphasized the fact that the autobiographic
statements of inverts, as to the time of the appearance of their
tendency to inversion, are untrustworthy as they may have repressed from
memory any evidences of heterosexual feelings.

Psychoanalysis has confirmed this suspicion in all cases of inversion
accessible, and has decidedly changed their anamnesis by filling up the
infantile amnesias.

[6] With what reserve the diagnosis of degeneration should be made and
what slight practical significance can be attributed to it can be
gathered from the discussions of Moebius (Ueber Entartung; Grenzfragen
des Nerven- und Seelenlebens, No. III, 1900). He says: "If we review the
wide sphere of degeneration upon which we have here turned some light we
can conclude without further ado that it is really of little value to
diagnose degeneration."

[7] We must agree with the spokesman of "Uranism" that some of the most
prominent men known have been inverts and perhaps absolute inverts.

[8] In the conception of inversion the pathological features have been
Separated from the anthropological. For this credit is due to I. Bloch
(Beitraege zur Aetiologie der Psychopathia Sexualis, 2 Teile, 1902-3), who
has also brought into prominence the existence of inversion in the old
civilized nations.

[9] Compare the last detailed discussion of somatic hermaphroditism
(Taruffi, Hermaphroditismus und Zeugungsunfaehigkeit, German edit. by R.
Teuscher, 1903), and the works of Neugebauer in many volumes of the
Jahrbuch fuer sexuelle Zwischenstufen.

[10] J. Halban, "Die Entstehung der Geschlechtscharaktere," Arch. fuer
Gynaekologie, Bd. 70, 1903. See also there the literature on the subject.

[11] According to a report in Vol. 6 of the Jahrbuch f. sexuelle
Zwischenstufen, E. Gley is supposed to have been the first to mention
bisexuality as an explanation of inversion. He published a paper (Les
Aberrations de l'instinct Sexuel) in the Revue Philosophique as early as
January, 1884. It is moreover noteworthy that the majority of authors
who trace the inversion to bisexuality assume this factor not only for
the inverts but also for those who have developed normally, and justly
interpret the inversion as a result of a disturbance in development.
Among these authors are Chevalier (Inversion Sexuelle, 1893), and v.
Krafft-Ebing ("Zur Erklaerung der kontraeren Sexualempfindung," Jahrbuecher
f. Psychiatrie u. Nervenheilkunde, XIII), who states that there are a
number of observations "from which at least the virtual and continued
existence of this second center (of the underlying sex) results." A Dr.
Arduin (Die Frauenfrage und die sexuellen Zwischenstufen, 2d vol. of the
Jahrbuch f. sexuelle Zwischenstufen, 1900) states that "in every man
there exist male and female elements." See also the same Jahrbuch, Bd.
I, 1899 ("Die objektive Diagnose der Homosexualitat," by M. Hirschfeld,
pp. 8-9). In the determination of sex, as far as heterosexual persons
are concerned, some are disproportionately more strongly developed than
others. G. Herman is firm in his belief "that in every woman there are
male, and in every man there are female germs and qualities" (Genesis,
das Gesetz der Zeugung, 9 Bd., Libido und Manie, 1903). As recently as
1906 W. Fliess (Der Ablauf des Lebens) has claimed ownership of the idea
of bisexuality (in the sense of double sex). Psychoanalytic
investigation very strongly opposes the attempt to separate homosexuals
from other persons as a group of a special nature. By also studying
sexual excitations other than the manifestly open ones it discovers that
all men are capable of homosexual object selection and actually
accomplish this in the unconscious. Indeed the attachments of libidinous
feelings to persons of the same sex play no small role as factors in
normal psychic life, and as causative factors of disease they play a
greater role than those belonging to the opposite sex. According to
psychoanalysis, it rather seems that it is the independence of the
object, selection of the sex of the object, the same free disposal over
male and female objects, as observed in childhood, in primitive states
and in prehistoric times, which forms the origin from which the normal
as well as the inversion types developed, following restrictions in this
or that direction. In the psychoanalytic sense the exclusive sexual
interest of the man for the woman is also a problem requiring an
explanation, and is not something that is self-evident and explainable
on the basis of chemical attraction. The determination as to the
definite sexual behavior does not occur until after puberty and is the
result of a series of as yet not observable factors, some of which are
of a constitutional, while some are of an accidental nature. Certainly
some of these factors can turn out to be so enormous that by their
character they influence the result. In general, however, the
multiplicity of the determining factors is reflected by the manifoldness
of the outcomes in the manifest sexual behavior of the person. In the
inversion types it can be ascertained that they are altogether
controlled by an archaic constitution and by primitive psychic
mechanisms. The importance of the _narcissistic object selection_ and
the _clinging_ to the erotic significance of the _anal_ zone seem to be
their most essential characteristics. But one gains nothing by
separating the most extreme inversion types from the others on the basis
of such constitutional peculiarities. What is found in the latter as
seemingly an adequate determinant can also be demonstrated only in
lesser force in the constitution of transitional types and in manifestly
normal persons. The differences in the results may be of a qualitative
nature, but analysis shows that the differences in the determinants are
only quantitative. As a remarkable factor among the accidental
influences of the object selection, we found the sexual rejection or the
early sexual intimidation, and our attention was also called to the fact
that the existence of both parents plays an important role in the
child's life. The disappearance of a strong father in childhood not
infrequently favors the inversion. Finally, one might demand that the
inversion of the sexual object should notionally be strictly separated
from the mixing of the sex characteristics in the subject. A certain
amount of independence is unmistakable also in this relation.

[12] Although psychoanalysis has not yet given us a full explanation for
the origin of inversion, it has revealed the psychic mechanism of its
genesis and has essentially enriched the problems in question. In all
the cases examined we have ascertained that the later inverts go through
in their childhood a phase of very intense but short-lived fixation on
the woman (usually on the mother) and after overcoming it they identify
themselves with the woman and take themselves as the sexual object; that
is, proceeding on a narcissistic basis, they look for young men
resembling themselves in persons whom they wish to love as their mother
has loved them. We have, moreover, frequently found that alleged inverts
are by no means indifferent to the charms of women, but the excitation
evoked by the woman is always transferred to a male object. They thus
repeat through life the mechanism which gave origin to their inversion.
Their obsessive striving for the man proves to be determined by their
restless flight from the woman.

[13] The most pronounced difference between the sexual life
(Liebesleben) of antiquity and ours lies in the fact that the ancients
placed the emphasis on the impulse itself, while we put it on its
object. The ancients extolled the impulse and were ready to ennoble
through it even an inferior object, while we disparage the activity of
the impulse as such and only countenance it on account of the merits of
the object.

[14] I must mention here that the blind obedience evinced by the
hypnotized subject to the hypnotist causes me to think that the nature
of hypnosis is to be found in the unconscious fixation of the libido on
the person of the hypnotizer (by means of the masochistic component of
the sexual impulse).

Ferenczi connects this character of suggestibility with the "parent
complex" (Jahrbuch fuer Psychoanalytische und psychopathologische
Forschungen, I, 1909).

[15] Moreover, it is to be noted that sexual overvaluation does not
become pronounced in all mechanisms of object selection, and that we
shall later learn to know another and more direct explanation for the
sexual role of the other parts of the body.

[16] Further investigations lead to the conclusion that I. Bloch has
overestimated the factor of excitement-hunger (Reizhunger). The various
roads upon which the libido moves behave to each other from the very
beginning like communicating pipes; the factor of collateral streaming
must also be considered.

[17] This weakness corresponds to the constitutional predisposition. The
early sexual intimidation which pushes the person away from the normal
sexual aim and urges him to seek a substitute, has been demonstrated by
psychoanalysis, as an accidental determinant.

[18] The shoe or slipper is accordingly a symbol for the female
genitals.

[19] Psychoanalysis has filled up the gap in the understanding of
fetichisms by showing that the selection of the fetich depends on a
coprophilic smell-desire which has been lost by repression. Feet and
hair are strong smelling objects which are raised to fetiches after the
renouncing of the now unpleasant sensation of smell. Accordingly, only
the filthy and ill-smelling foot is the sexual object in the perversion
which corresponds to the foot fetichism. Another contribution to the
explanation of the fetichistic preference of the foot is found in the
Infantile Sexual Theories (see later). The foot replaces the penis which
is so much missed in the woman. In some cases of foot fetichism it could
be shown that the desire for looking originally directed to the
genitals, which wished to reach its object from below, was stopped on
the way by prohibition and repression, and therefore adhered to the foot
or shoe as a fetich. In conformity with infantile expectation, the
female genital was hereby imagined as a male genital.

[20] I have no doubt that the conception of the "beautiful" is rooted in
the soil of sexual excitement and originally signified the sexual
excitant. The more remarkable, therefore, is the fact that the genitals,
the sight of which provokes the greatest sexual excitement, can really
never be considered "beautiful."

[21] Cf. here the later communication on the pregenital phases of the
sexual development, in which this view is confirmed. See below,
"Ambivalence."

[22] Instead of substantiating this statement by many examples I will
merely cite Havelock Ellis (The Sexual Impulse, 1903): "All known cases
of sadism and masochism, even those cited by v. Krafft-Ebing, always
show (as has already been shown by Colin, Scott, and Fere) traces of
both groups of manifestations in the same individual."

[23] On the other hand the restricting forces of the sexual
evolution--disgust, shame, morality--must also be looked upon as
historic precipitates of the outer inhibitions which the sexual impulse
experienced in the psychogenesis of humanity. One can observe that they
appear in their time during the development of the individual almost
spontaneously at the call of education and influence.

[24] Studien ueber Hysterie, 1895, J. Breuer tells of the patient on whom
he first practiced the cathartic method: "The sexual factor was
surprisingly undeveloped."

[25] The well-known fancies of perverts which under favorable conditions
are changed into contrivances, the delusional fears of paranoiacs which
are in a hostile manner projected on others, and the unconscious fancies
of hysterics which are discovered in their symptoms by psychoanalysis,
agree as to content in the minutest details.

[26] A psychoneurosis very often associates itself with a manifest
inversion in which the heterosexual feeling becomes subjected to
complete repression.--It is but just to state that the necessity of a
general recognition of the tendency to inversion in psychoneurotics was
first imparted to me personally by Wilh. Fliess, of Berlin, after I had
myself discovered it in some cases.

[27] It is not easy to justify here this assumption which was taken from
a definite class of neurotic diseases. On the other hand, it would be
impossible to assert anything definite concerning the impulses if one
did not take the trouble of mentioning these presuppositions.

[28] One should here think of Moll's assertion, who divides the sexual
impulse into the impulses of contrectation and detumescence.
Contrectation signifies a desire to touch the skin.


