

I.

``_And it shall come to pass in the last days, sayeth God, I will pour out my
spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall see visions,
and your old men shall dream dreams_.''--Acts ii, 17.

_Ice_.

To dream of ice, betokens much distress, and evil-minded persons
will seek to injure you in your best work.

To see ice floating in a stream of clear water, denotes that your happiness
will be interrupted by ill-tempered and jealous friends.

To dream that you walk on ice, you risk much solid comfort and respect
for evanescent joys.

For a young woman to walk on ice, is a warning that only a thin
veil hides her from shame.

To see icicles on the eaves of houses, denotes misery and want of comfort.
Ill health is foreboded.

To see icicles on the fence, denotes suffering bodily and mentally.

To see them on trees, despondent hopes will grow gloomier.

To see them on evergreens, a bright future will be overcast with the shadow
of doubtful honors.

To dream that you make ice, you will make a failure of your life
through egotism and selfishness.

Eating ice, foretells sickness.  If you drink ice-water, you will bring
ill health from dissipation.

Bathing in ice-water, anticipated pleasures will be interrupted
with an unforeseen event.

_Ice Cream_.

To dream that you are eating ice cream, foretells you
will have happy success in affairs already undertaken.
To see children eating it, denotes prosperity and happiness
will attend you most favorably.

For a young woman to upset her ice cream in the presence
of her lover or friend, denotes she will be flirted with
because of her unkindness to others.  To see sour ice cream,
denotes some unexpected trouble will interfere with your pleasures.
If it is melted, your anticipated pleasure will reach stagnation
before it is realized.

_Icicles_.[98]

To see icicles falling from trees, denotes that some distinctive misfortune,
or trouble, will soon vanish.


[98] See Ice.

_Ideal_.

For a young woman to dream of meeting her ideal,
foretells a season of uninterrupted pleasure and contentment.
For a bachelor to dream of meeting his ideal, denotes he will
soon experience a favorable change in his affairs.

_Idiot_.

Idiots in a dream, foretells disagreements and losses.

To dream that you are an idiot, you will feel humiliated and downcast
over the miscarriage of plans.

To see idiotic children, denotes affliction and unhappy changes in life.

_Idle_.

If you dream of being idle, you will fail to accomplish your designs.

To see your friends in idleness, you will hear of some trouble affecting them.

For a young woman to dream that she is leading an idle existence,
she will fall into bad habits, and is likely to marry a shiftless man.

_Idols_.

Should you dream of worshiping idols, you will make slow progress to wealth
or fame, as you will let petty things tyrannize over you.

To break idols, signifies a strong mastery over self, and no work
will deter you in your upward rise to positions of honor.

To see others worshiping idols, great differences will rise up
between you and warm friends.

To dream that you are denouncing idolatry, great distinction
is in store for you through your understanding of the natural
inclinations of the human mind.

_Illness_.[99]

For a woman to dream of her own illness, foretells that some unforeseen
event will throw her into a frenzy of despair by causing her to miss
some anticipated visit or entertainment.


[99] See Sickness.

_Illumination_.

If you see strange and weird illuminations in your dreams,
you will meet with disappointments and failures on every hand.

Illuminated faces, indicate unsettled business, both private and official.

To see the heavens illuminated, with the moon in all her weirdness,
unnatural stars and a red sun, or a golden one, you may look
for distress in its worst form.  Death, family troubles,
and national upheavals will occur.

To see children in the lighted heavens, warns you to control your feelings,
as irrevocable wrong may be done in a frenzy of feeling arising over seeming
neglect by your dear ones.

To see illuminated human figures or animals in the heavens,
denotes failure and trouble; dark clouds overshadow fortune.
To see them fall to the earth and men shoot them with guns,
many troubles and obstacles will go to nought before your energy
and determination to rise.

To see illuminated snakes, or any other creeping thing, enemies will
surround you, and use hellish means to overthrow you.

_Image_.

If you dream that you see images, you will have poor success
in business or love.

To set up an image in your home, portends that you will be weak
minded and easily led astray.  Women should be careful of their
reputation after a dream of this kind.  If the images are ugly,
you will have trouble in your home.

_Imitation_.

To dream of imitations, means that persons are working to deceive you.
For a young woman to dream some one is imitating her lover or herself,
foretells she will be imposed upon, and will suffer for the faults of others.

_Implements_.

To dream of implements, denotes unsatisfactory means of accomplishing
some work.  If the implements are broken, you will be threatened with death
or serious illness of relatives or friends, or failure n business.

_Imps_.

To see imps in your dream, signifies trouble from what seems
a passing pleasure.

To dream that you are an imp, denotes that folly and vice will bring
you to poverty.

_Inauguration_.

To dream of inauguration, denotes you will rise to higher position than
you have yet enjoyed.  For a young woman to be disappointed in attending
an inauguration, predicts she will fail to obtain her wishes.

_Incantation_.

To dream you are using incantations, signifies unpleasantness between
husband and wife, or sweethearts.  To hear others repeating them,
implies dissembling among your friends.

_Incest_.

To dream of incestuous practices, denotes you will fall from honorable places,
and will also suffer loss in business.

_Incoherent_.

To dream of incoherency, usually denotes extreme nervousness and excitement
through the oppression of changing events.

_Income_.

To dream of coming into the possession of your income, denotes that you
may deceive some one and cause trouble to your family and friends.

To dream that some of your family inherits an income,
predicts success for you.

For a woman to dream of losing her income, signifies disappointments in life.

To dream that your income is insufficient to support you,
denotes trouble to relatives or friends.

To dream of a portion of your income remaining, signifies that you
will be very successful for a short time, but you may expect more
than you receive.

_Increase_.

To dream of an increase in your family, may denote failure
in some of your plans, and success to another.

To dream of an increase in your business, signifies that you
will overcome existing troubles.

_Independent_.

To dream that you are very independent, denotes that you have a rival
who may do you an injustice.

To dream that you gain an independence of wealth, you may not
be so succcessful{sic} at that time as you expect, but good
results are promised.

_India Rubber_.

To dream of India rubber, denotes unfavorable changes in your affairs.
If you stretch it, you will try to establish a greater business than
you can support.

_Indifference_.

To dream of indifference, signifies pleasant companions for a very short time.

For a young woman to dream that her sweetheart is indifferent to her,
signifies that he may not prove his affections in the most appropriate way.
To dream that she is indifferent to him, means that she will prove
untrue to him.

_Indigo_.

To see indigo in a dream, denotes you will deceive friendly
persons in order to cheat them out of their be longings.
To see indigo water, foretells you will be involved in an
ugly love affair.

_Indigestion_.

To dream of indigestion, indicates unhealthy and gloomy surroundings.

_Indistinct_.

If in your dreams you see objects indistinctly, it portends unfaithfulness
in friendships, and uncertain dealings.

_Indulgence_.

For a woman to dream of indulgence, denotes that she will not escape
unfavorable comment on her conduct.

_Industry_.

To dream that you are industrious, denotes that you will be unusually
active in planning and working out ideas to further your interests,
and that you will be successful in your undertakings.

For a lover to dream of being industriously at work, shows he will succeed
in business, and that his companion will advance his position.

To see others busy, is favorable to the dreamer.

_Infants_.

To dream of seeing a newly born infant, denotes pleasant surprises
are nearing you.  For a young woman to dream she has an infant,
foretells she will be accused of indulgence in immoral pastime.
To see an infant swimming, portends a fortunate escape
from some entanglement.

_Infirmary_.[100]

To dream that you leave an infirmary, denotes your escape from wily
enemies who will cause you much worry.


[100] See Hospital.

_Infirmities_.

To dream of infirmities, denotes misfortune in love and business;
enemies are not to be misunderstood, and sickness may follow.

To dream that you see others infirm, denotes that you may have various
troubles and disappointments in business.

_Influence_.

If you dream of seeking rank or advancement through the influence
of others, your desires will fail to materialize; but if you
are in an influential position, your prospects will assume
a bright form.

To see friends in high positions, your companions will be congenial,
and you will be free from vexations.

_Inheritance_.[101]

To dream that you receive an inheritance, foretells that you
will be successful in easily obtaining your desires.


[101] See Estate.

_Injury_.[102]

To dream of an injury being done you, signifies that an unfortunate
occurrence will soon grieve and vex you.


[102] See Hurt.

_Ink_.

To see ink spilled over one's clothing, many small and spiteful
meannesses will be wrought you through envy.

If a young woman sees ink, she will be slandered by a rival.

To dream that you have ink on your fingers, you will be jealous
and seek to injure some one unless you exercise your better nature.
If it is red ink, you will be involved in a serious trouble.

To dream that you make ink, you will engage in a low and debasing business,
and you will fall into disreputable associations.

To see bottles of ink in your dreams, indicates enemies
and unsuccessful interests.

_Ink-stand_.

Empty ink-stands denote that you will narrowly escape public denunciation
for some supposed injustice.

To see them filled with ink, if you are not cautious, enemies will
succeed in calumniation.

_Inn_.

To dream of an inn, denotes prosperity and pleasures, if the inn
is commodious and well furnished.

To be at a dilapidated and ill kept inn, denotes poor success,
or mournful tasks, or unhappy journeys.

_Inquest_.

To dream of an inquest, foretells you will be unfortunate
in your friendships.

_Inquisition_.

To dream of an inquisition, bespeaks for you an endless round
of trouble and great disappointment.

If you are brought before an inquisition on a charge of wilfulness,
you will be unable to defend yourself from malicious slander.

_Insane_.

To dream of being insane, forebodes disastrous results to some newly
undertaken work, or ill health may work sad changes in your prospects.

To see others insane, denotes disagreeable contact with suffering
and appeals from the poverty-stricken. The utmost care should be taken
of the health after this dream.

_Inscription_.

To dream you see an inscription, foretells you will shortly
receive unpleasant communications.  If you are reading them
on tombs, you will be distressed by sickness of a grave nature.
To write one, you will lose a valued friend.

_Insolvent_.

If you dream that you are insolvent, you will not have to resort
to this means to square yourself with the world, as your energy
and pride will enable you to transact business in a fair way.
But other worries may sorely afflict you.

To dream that others are insolvent, you will meet with honest
men in your dealings, but by their frankness they may harm you.
For a young woman, it means her sweetheart will be honest and thrifty,
but vexatious discords may arise in her affairs.

_Intemperance_.

To dream of being intemperate in the use of your intellectual forces,
you will seek after foolish knowledge fail to benefit yourself,
and give pain and displeasure to your friends.

If you are intemperate in love, or other passions, you will reap disease
or loss of fortune and esteem.  For a young woman to thus dream,
she will lose a lover and incur the displeasure of close friends.

_Intercede_.

To intercede for some one in your dreams, shows you will secure
aid when you desire it most.

_Intermarry_.

To dream of intermarrying, denotes quarrels and contentions
which will precipitate you into trouble and loss.

_Interpreter_.

To dream of an interpreter, denotes you will undertake affairs
which will fail in profit.

_Intestine_.

To dream of seeing intestines, signifies you are about to be
visited by a grave calamity, which will remove some friend.
To see your own intestines, denotes grave situations are
closing around you; sickness of a nature to affect you
in your daily communications with others threatens you.
Probable loss, with much displeasure, is also denoted.
If you think you lay them upon something, which turns
out to be a radiator, and they begin to grow hot and make
you very uncomfortable, and you ask others to assist you,
and they refuse, it foretells unexpected calamity, which will
probably come in the form of a desperate illness or a misfortune
for which you will be censured by those formerly your friends.
You may have trouble in extricating yourself from
an unpromising predicament.

_Intoxication_.[103]

To dream of intoxication, denotes that you are cultivating your desires
for illicit pleasures.


[103] See Drunk.

_Inundation_.[104]

To dream of seeing cities or country submerged in dark, seething waters,
denotes great misfortune and loss of life through some dreadful calamity.

To see human beings swept away in an inundation, portends bereavements
and despair, making life gloomy and unprofitable.

To see a large area inundated with clear water, denotes profit and ease
after seemingly hopeless struggles with fortune.


[104] See Food.

_Invalid_.

To dream of invalids, is a sign of displeasing companions interfering
with your interest.  To think you are one, portends you are threatened
with displeasing circumstances.

_Invective_.

To dream of using invectives, warns you of passionate outbursts of anger,
which may estrange you from close companions.

To hear others using them, enemies are closing you in to apparent
wrong and deceits.

_Inventor_.

To dream of an inventor, foretells you will soon achieve
some unique work which will add honor to your name.
To dream that you are inventing something, or feel interested
in some invention, denotes you will aspire to fortune and will
be successful in your designs.

_Invite_.

To dream that you invite persons to visit you, denotes that some
unpleasant event is near, and will cause worry and excitement
in your otherwise pleasant surroundings.

If you are invited to make a visit, you will receive sad news.

For a woman to dream that she is invited to attend a party,
she will have pleasant anticipations, but ill luck will mar them.

_Iron_.

To dream of iron, is a harsh omen of distress.

To feel an iron weight bearing you down, signifies mental perplexities
and material losses.

To strike with iron, denotes selfishness and cruelty to those
dependent upon you.

To dream that you manufacture iron, denotes that you will use
unjust means to accumulate wealth.

To sell iron, you will have doubtful success, and your friends
will not be of noble character.

To see old, rusty iron, signifies poverty and disappointment.

To dream that the price of iron goes down, you will realize that fortune
is a very unsafe factor in your life.

If iron advances, you will see a gleam of hope in a dark prospectus.

To see red-hot iron in your dreams, denotes failure for you
by misapplied energy.

_Ironing_.

To dream of ironing, denotes domestic comforts and orderly business.

If a woman dreams that she burns her hands while ironing,
it foretells she will have illness or jealousy to disturb her peace.
If she scorches the clothes, she will have a rival who will cause
her much displeasure and suspicions.  If the irons seem too cold,
she will lack affection in her home.

_Island_.

To dream that you are on an island in a clear stream,
signifies pleasant journeys and fortunate enterprises.
To a woman, this omens a happy marriage.

A barren island, indicates forfeiture of happiness and
money through intemperance.

To see an island, denotes comfort and easy circumstances after much
striving and worrying to meet honorable obligations.

To see people on an island, denotes a struggle to raise yourself higher
in prominent circles.

_Itch_.

To see persons with the itch, and you endeavor to escape contact,
you will stand in fear of distressing results when your endeavors
will bring pleasant success.

If you dream you have the itch yourself, you will be harshly used,
and will defend yourself by incriminating others.  For a young woman
to have this dream, omens she will fall into dissolute companionship.

To dream that you itch, denotes unpleasant avocations.

_Ivory_.

To dream of ivory, is favorable to the fortune of the dreamer.

To see huge pieces of ivory being carried, denotes financial
success and pleasures unalloyed.

_Ivy_.

To dream of seeing ivy growing on trees or houses, predicts excellent
health and increase of fortune.  Innumerable joys will succeed this dream.
To a young woman, it augurs many prized distinctions.  If she sees ivy
clinging to the wall in the moonlight, she will have clandestine meetings
with young men.

Withered ivy, denotes broken engagements and sadness.



J.

``_Then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions_.''--
Job vii, 14

_Jackdaw_.

To see a jackdaw, denotes ill health and quarrels.
To catch one, you will outwit enemies.

To kill one, you will come into possession of disputed property.

_Jail_.[105]

To see others in jail, you will be urged to grant privileges to persons
whom you believe to be unworthy

To see negroes in jail, denotes worries and loss through
negligence of underlings.

For a young woman to dream that her lover is in jail, she will be disappointed
in his character, as he will prove a deceiver.


[105] See Gaol.  _Jailer_.

To see a jailer, denotes that treachery will embarrass your interests
and evil women will enthrall you.

To see a mob attempting to break open a jail, is a forerunner of evil,
and desperate measures will be used to extort money and bounties from you.

_Jam_.

To dream of eating jam, if pure, denotes pleasant surprises and journeys.

To dream of making jam, foretells to a woman a happy home
and appreciative friends.

_Janitor_.

To dream of a janitor, denotes bad management and disobedient children.
Unworthy servants will annoy you.

To look for a janitor and fail to find him, petty annoyances
will disturb your otherwise placid existence.  If you find him,
you will have pleasant associations with strangers, and your
affairs will have no hindrances.

_January_.

To dream of this month, denotes you will be afflicted with unloved
companions or children.

_Jar_.

To dream of empty jars, denotes impoverishment and distress.

To see them full, you will be successful.

If you buy jars, your success will be precarious and your burden
will be heavy.

To see broken jars, distressing sickness or deep disappointment awaits you.

_Jasper_.

To dream of seeing jasper, is a happy omen, bringing success and love.
For a young woman to lose a jasper, is a sign of disagreement with her lover.

_Jaundice_.

To dream that you have the jaundice, denotes prosperity
after temporary embarrassments.

To see others with jaundice, you will be worried with unpleasant companions
and discouraging prospects.

_Javelin_.

To dream of defending yourself with a javelin, your most private
affairs will be searched into to establish claims of dishonesty,
and you will prove your innocence after much wrangling.

If you are pierced by a javelin, enemies will succeed in giving you trouble.

To see others carrying javelins, your interests are threatened.

_Jaws_.

To dream of seeing heavy, misshapen jaws, denotes disagreements,
and ill feeling will be shown between friends.

If you dream that you are in the jaws of a wild beast,
enemies will work injury to your affairs and happiness.
This is a vexatious and perplexing dream.

If your own jaws ache with pain, you will be exposed to climatic changes,
and malaria may cause you loss in health and finances.

_Jay-bird_.

To dream of a jay-bird, foretells pleasant visits from friends
and interesting gossips.

To catch a jay-bird, denotes pleasant, though unfruitful, tasks.

To see a dead jay-bird, denotes domestic unhappiness and many vicissitudes.

_Jealousy_.

To dream that you are jealous of your wife, denotes the influence
of enemies and narrow-minded persons.  If jealous of your sweetheart,
you will seek to displace a rival.

If a woman dreams that she is jealous of her husband, she will find
many shocking incidents to vex and make her happiness a travesty.

If a young woman is jealous of her lover, she will find that he is more
favorably impressed with the charms of some other woman than herself.

If men and women are jealous over common affairs, they will meet
many unpleasant worries in the discharge of every-day business.

_Jelly_.

To dream of eating jelly, many pleasant interruptions will take place.

For a woman to dream of making jelly, signifies she will enjoy pleasant
reunions with friends.

_Jessamine_.

To dream of jessamine, denotes you are approximating some exquisite pleasure,
but which will be fleeting.

_Jester_.

To dream of a jester, foretells you will ignore important things in looking
after silly affairs.

_Jew_.

To dream of being in company with a Jew, signifies untiring ambition
and an irrepressible longing after wealth and high position,
which will be realized to a very small extent.

To have transactions with a Jew, you will prosper legally
in important affairs.

For a young woman to dream of a Jew, omens that she will mistake flattery
for truth, and find that she is only a companion for pleasure.

For a man to dream of a Jewess, denotes that his desires
run parallel with voluptuousness and easy comfort.
He should constitute himself woman's defender.

For a Gentile to dream of Jews, signifies worldly cares and profit
from dealing with them.

To argue with them, your reputation is endangered from a business standpoint.

_Jewelry_.

To dream of broken jewelry, denotes keen disappointment in attaining
one's highest desires.

If the jewelry be cankered, trusted friends will fail you,
and business cares will be on you.

_Jewels_.

To dream of jewels, denotes much pleasure and riches.

To wear them, brings rank and satisfied ambitions.

To see others wearing them, distinguished places will be held by you,
or by some friend.

To dream of jeweled garments, betokens rare good fortune to the dreamer.
Inheritance or speculation will raise him to high positions.

If you inherit jewelry, your prosperity will be unusual,
but not entirely satisfactory.

To dream of giving jewelry away, warns you that some vital estate
is threatening you.

For a young woman to dream that she receives jewelry, indicates much
pleasure and a desirable marriage.  To dream that she loses jewels,
she will meet people who will flatter and deceive her.

To find jewels, denotes rapid and brilliant advancement in affairs
of interest.  To give jewels away, you will unconsciously work
detriment to yourself.

To buy them, proves that you will be very successful in momentous affairs,
especially those pertaining to the heart.

_Jew's-harp_.

To dream of a Jew's-harp, foretells you will experience a slight
improvement in your affairs.  To play one, is a sign that you
will fall in love with a stranger.

_Jig_.

To dance a jig, denotes cheerful occupations and light pleasures.

To see negroes dancing a jig, foolish worries will offset pleasure.

To see your sweetheart dancing a jig, your companion will be possessed
with a merry and hopeful disposition.

To see ballet girls dancing a jig, you will engage in undignified
amusements and follow low desires.

_Jockey_.

To dream of a jockey, omens you will appreciate a gift
from an unexpected source.  For a young woman to dream
that she associates with a jockey, or has one for a lover,
indicates she will win a husband out of her station.
To see one thrown from a horse, signifies you will be called
on for aid by strangers.

_Jolly_.

To dream that you feel jolly and are enjoying the merriment
of companions, you will realize pleasure from the good
behavior of children and have satisfying results in business.
If there comes the least rift in the merriment, worry will
intermingle with the success of the future.

_Journey_.

To dream that you go on a journey, signifies profit or a disappointment,
as the travels are pleasing and successful or as accidents and disagreeable
events take active part in your journeying.

To see your friends start cheerfully on a journey, signifies delightful
change and more harmonious companions than you have heretofore known.
If you see them depart looking sad, it may be many moons before you see
them again.  Power and loss are implied.

To make a long-distance journey in a much shorter time than you expected,
denotes you will accomplish some work in a surprisingly short time,
which will be satisfactory in the way of reimbursement.

_Journeyman_.

To dream of a journeyman, denotes you are soon to lose money
by useless travels.  For a woman, this dream brings pleasant trips,
though unexpected ones.

_Joy_.

To dream that you feel joy over any event, denotes harmony among friends.

_Jubilee_.

To dream of a jubilee, denotes many pleasureable enterprises in which you
will be a participant.  For a young woman, this is a favorable dream,
pointing to matrimony and increase of temporal blessings.

To dream of a religious jubilee, denotes close but comfortable environments.

_Judge_.

To dream of coming before a judge, signifies that disputes will be
settled by legal proceedings.  Business or divorce cases may assume
gigantic proportions.  To have the case decided in your favor,
denotes a successful termination to the suit; if decided against you,
then you are the aggressor and you should seek to right injustice.

_Judgment Day_.

To dream of the judgment day, foretells that you will accomplish some
well-planned work, if you appear resigned and hopeful of escaping punishment.
Otherwise, your work will prove a failure.

For a young woman to appear before the judgment bar and hear the verdict
of ``Guilty,'' denotes that she will cause much distress among her friends
by her selfish and unbecoming conduct.  If she sees the dead rising,
and all the earth solemnly and fearfully awaiting the end, there will
be much struggling for her, and her friends will refuse her aid.
It is also a forerunner of unpleasant gossip, and scandal is threatened.
Business may assume hopeless aspects.

_Jug_.

If you dream of jugs well filled with transparent liquids,
your welfare is being considered by more than yourself.
Many true friends will unite to please and profit you.
If the jugs are empty, your conduct will estrange you from
friends and station.

Broken jugs, indicate sickness and failures in employment.

If you drink wine from a jug, you will enjoy robust health and find
pleasure in all circles.  Optimistic views will possess you.

To take an unpleasant drink from a jug, disappointment and disgust
will follow pleasant anticipations.

_July_.

To dream of this month, denotes you will be depressed with
gloomy outlooks, but, as suddenly, your spirits will rebound
to unimagined pleasure and good fortune.

_Jumping_.

If you dream of jumping over any object, you will succeed in every endeavor;
but if you jump and fall back, disagreeable affairs will render
life almost intolerable.

To jump down from a wall, denotes reckless speculations and
disappointment in love.

_Jumping-jack_.

To dream of a jumping-jack, denotes that idleness and trivial
pastimes will occupy your thoughts to the exclusion of serious
and sustaining plans.

_June_.

To dream of June, foretells unusual gains in all undertakings.

For a woman to think that vegetation is decaying, or that a drouth
is devastating the land, she will have sorrow and loss which will
be lasting in its effects.

_Juniper_.

To dream of seeing a juniper tree, portends happiness and wealth
out of sorrow and depressed conditions.  For a young woman,
this dreams omens a bright future after disappointing love affairs.
To the sick, this is an augury of speedy recovery.

To eat, or gather, the berries of a juniper tree, foretells
trouble and sickness.

_Jury_.

To dream that you are on the jury, denotes dissatisfaction
with your employments, and you will seek to materially
change your position.

If you are cleared from a charge by the jury, your business will be
successful and affairs will move your way, but if you should be condemned,
enemies will overpower you and harass you beyond endurance.

_Justice_.

To dream that you demand justice from a person, denotes that you
are threatened with embarrassments through the false statements
of people who are eager for your downfall.

If some one demands the same of you, you will find that your conduct
and reputation are being assailed, and it will be extremely doubtful
if you refute the charges satisfactorily.



K.

``_In thoughts from the vision of the night, when deep sleep
falleth on men, fear came upon me, and trembling, which made
all my bones to shake_.''-Job iv, 13-14.

_Kaleidoscope_.

Kaleidoscopes working before you in a dream, portend swift changes
with little of favorable promise in them.

_Kangaroo_.

To see a kangaroo in your dreams, you will outwit a wily enemy who seeks
to place you in an unfavorable position before the public and the person
you are striving to win.

If a kangaroo attacks you, your reputation will be in jeopardy.

If you kill one, you will succeed in spite of enemies and obstacles.

To see a kangaroo's hide, denotes that you are in a fair way
to success.  _Katydids_.

To dream of hearing katydids, is a prognostic of misfortune and unusual
dependence on others.  If any sick person ask you what they are,
foretells there will be surprising events in your present and future.

For a woman to see them, signifies she will have a quarrelsome
husband or lover.

_Keg_.

To dream of a keg, denotes you will have a struggle to throw off oppression.
Broken ones, indicate separation from family or friends.

_Kettle_.

To see kettles in your dream, denotes great and laborious work before you.

To see a kettle of boiling water, your struggles will soon end and a change
will come to you.

To see a broken kettle, denotes failure after a mighty effort
to work out a path to success.

For a young woman to dream of handling dark kettles, foretells disappointment
in love and marriage; but a light-colored kettle brings to her absolute
freedom from care, and her husband will be handsome and worthy.

_Key_.

To dream of keys, denotes unexpected changes.

If the keys are lost, unpleasant adventures will affect you.

To find keys, brings domestic peace and brisk turns to business.

Broken keys, portends separation either through death or jealousy.

For a young woman to dream of losing the key to any personal ornament,
denotes she will have quarrels with her lover, and will suffer much
disquiet therefrom.  If she dreams of unlocking a door with a key,
she will have a new lover and have over-confidence in him.  If she locks
a door with a key, she will be successful in selecting a husband.
If she gives the key away, she will fail to use judgment in conversation
and darken her own reputation.

_Keyhole_.

To dream that you spy upon others through a keyhole,
you will damage some person by disclosing confidence.
If you catch others peeping through a keyhole, you will have
false friends delving into your private matters to advance
themselves over you.

To dream that you cannot find the keyhole, you will unconsciously
injure a friend.

_Kid_.

To dream of a kid, denotes you will not be over-scrupulous in your morals
or pleasures.  You will be likely to bring grief to some loving heart.

_Kidneys_.

To dream about your kidneys, foretells you are threatened
with a serious illness, or there will be trouble in marriage
relations for you.

If they act too freely, you will be a party to some racy intrigue.
If they refuse to perform their work, there will be a sensation,
and to your detriment.  If you eat kidney-stew, some officious person
will cause you disgust in some secret lover affair.

_Killing_.

To dream of killing a defenseless man, prognosticates sorrow
and failure in affairs.

If you kill one in defense, or kill a ferocious beast, it denotes
victory and a rise in position.

_King_.

To dream of a king, you are struggling with your might,
and ambition is your master.

To dream that you are crowned king, you will rise above your
comrades and co-workers.

If you are censured by a king, you will be reproved for a neglected duty.

For a young woman to be in the presence of a king, she will
marry a man whom she will fear.  To receive favors from a king,
she will rise to exalted positions and be congenially wedded.

_Kiss_.

To dream that you see children kissing, denotes happy reunions
in families and satisfactory work.

To dream that you kiss your mother, you will be very successful
in your enterprises, and be honored and beloved by your friends.

To kiss a brother or sister, denotes much pleasure and good
in your association.

To kiss your sweetheart in the dark, denotes dangers and immoral engagements.

To kiss her in the light, signifies honorable intentions occupy
your mind always in connection with women.

To kiss a strange woman, denotes loose morals and perverted integrity.

To dream of kissing illicitly, denotes dangerous past-times. The indulgence
of a low passion may bring a tragedy into well-thought-of homes.

To see your rival kiss your sweetheart, you are in danger
of losing her esteem.

For married people to kiss each other, denotes that harmony is prized
in the home life.

To dream of kissing a person on the neck, denotes passionate inclinations
and weak mastery of self.

If you dream of kissing an enemy, you will make advance towards
reconciliation with an angry friend.

For a young woman to dream that some person sees her kiss her lover,
indicates that spiteful envy is entertained for her by a false friend.
For her to see her lover kiss another, she will be disappointed in her
hopes of marriage.

_Kitchen_.

To dream of a kitchen, denotes you will be forced to meet emergencies which
will depress your spirits.  For a woman to dream that her kitchen is clear.
and orderly, foretells she will become the mistress of interesting fortunes.

_Kite_.

To dream of flying a kite, denotes a great show of wealth, or business,
but with little true soundness to it all.

To see the kite thrown upon the ground, foretells disappointment and failure.

To dream of making a kite, you will speculate largely on small
means and seek to win the one you love by misrepresentations.

To see children flying kites, denotes pleasant and light occupation.
If the kite ascends beyond the vision high hopes and aspirations
will resolve themselves into disappointments and loss.

_Kitten_.[106]

For a woman to dream of a beautiful fat, white kitten,
omens artful deception will be practised upon her, which will
almost ensnare her to destruction, but her good sense and
judgment will prevail in warding off unfortunate complications.
If the kittens are soiled, or colored and lean, she will be
victimized into glaring indiscretions.

To dream of kittens, denotes abominable small troubles and vexations
will pursue and work you loss, unless you kill the kitten, and then
you will overcome these worries.

To see snakes kill kittens, you have enemies who in seeking to injure
you will work harm to themselves.


[106] See Cats.

_Knapsack_.

To see a knapsack while dreaming, denotes you will find your
greatest pleasure away from the associations of friends.
For a woman to see an old dilapidated one, means poverty
and disagreeableness for her.

_Knee_.

To dream that your knees are too large, denotes sudden ill luck for you.
If they are stiff and pain you, swift and fearful calamity awaits you.

For a woman to dream that she has well-formed and smooth knees,
predicts she will have many admirers, but none to woo her in wedlock.

If they are soiled, sickness from dissipation is portended.
If they are unshapely, unhappy changes in her fortune will
displace ardent hopes.

To dream of knees is an unfortunate omen.

_Knife_.

To dream of a knife is bad for the dreamer, as it portends separation
and quarrels, and losses in affairs of a business character.

To see rusty knives, means dissatisfaction, and complaints
of those in the home, and separation of lovers.

Sharp knives and highly polished, denotes worry.
Foes are ever surrounding you.

Broken knives, denotes defeat whatever the pursuit, whether in
love or business.

To dream that you are wounded with a knife, foretells domestic troubles,
in which disobedient children will figure largely.  To the unmarried,
it denotes that disgrace may follow.

To dream that you stab another with a knife, denotes baseness of character,
and you should strive to cultivate a higher sense of right.

_Knife Grinder_.

To dream of a knife grinder, foretells unwarrantable liberties
will be taken with your possessions.  For a woman, this omens
unhappy unions and much drudgery.

_Knitting_.

For a woman to dream of knitting, denotes that she will possess
a quiet and peaceful home, where a loving companion and dutiful
children delight to give pleasure.

For a man to be in a kniting-mill, indicates thrift and a solid
rise in prospects.

For a young woman to dream of knitting, is an omen of a hasty
but propitious marriage.

For a young woman to dream that she works in a knitting-mill,
denotes that she will have a worthy and loyal lover.
To see the mill in which she works dilapidated, she will meet
with reverses in fortune and love.

_Knocker_.

To dream of using a knocker, foretells you will be forced to ask
aid and counsel of others.

_Knocking_.

To hear knocking in your dreams, denotes that tidings of a grave nature
will soon be received by you.  If you are awakened by the knocking,
the news will affect you the more seriously.

_Knots_.

To dream of seeing knots, denotes much worry over the most trifling affairs.
If your sweetheart notices another, you will immediately find cause
to censure him.

To tie a knot, signifies an independent nature, and you will refuse
to be nagged by ill-disposed lover or friend.

_Krishna_.

To see Krishna in your dreams, denotes that your greatest joy
will be in pursuit of occult knowledge, and you will school
yourself to the taunts of friends, and cultivate a philosophical
bearing toward life and sorrow.

