

L.


``_And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it to his brethren,
and said, `Behold, I have dreamed a dream more; and, behold, the sun
and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me_.'
''--Gen. xxxvii, 9.

_Label_.

To dream of a label, foretells you will let an enemy see the inside
of your private affairs, and will suffer from the negligence.

_Labor_.

To dream that you watch domestic animals laboring under heavy burdens,
denotes that you will be prosperous, but unjust to your servants,
or those employed by you.

To see men toiling, signifies profitable work, and robust health.
To labor yourself, denotes favorable outlook for any new enterprise,
and bountiful crops if the dreamer is interested in farming.

_Laboratory_.

To dream of being in a laboratory, denotes great energies wasted in unfruitful
enterprises when you might succeed in some more practical business.

If you think yourself an alchemist, and try to discover a process
to turn other things into gold, you will entertain far-reaching and
interesting projects, but you will fail to reach the apex of your ambition.
Wealth will prove a myth, and the woman you love will hold a false
position towards you.

_Labyrinth_.

If you dream of a labyrinth, you will find yourself entangled
in intricate and perplexing business conditions, and your wife
will make the home environment intolerable; children and sweethearts
will prove ill-tempered and unattractive.

If you are in a labyrinth of night or darkness, it foretells passing,
but agonizing sickness and trouble.

A labyrinth of green vines and timbers, denotes unexpected happiness
from what was seemingly a cause for loss and despair.

In a network, or labyrinth of railroads, assures you of long
and tedious journeys.  Interesting people will be met,
but no financial success will aid you on these journeys.

_Lace_.

See to it, if you are a lover, that your sweetheart wears lace,
as this dream brings fidelity in love and a rise in position.

If a woman dreams of lace, she will be happy in the realization
of her most ambitious desires, and lovers will bow to her edict.
No questioning or imperiousness on their part.

If you buy lace, you will conduct an expensive establishment,
but wealth will be a solid friend.

If you sell laces, your desires will outrun your resources.

For a young girl to dream of making lace, forecasts that she will win
a handsome, wealthy husband.  If she dreams of garnishing her wedding garments
with lace, she will be favored with lovers who will bow to her charms,
but the wedding will be far removed from her.

_Ladder_.[107]

To dream of a ladder being raised for you to ascend to some height,
your energetic and nervy qualifications will raise you into prominence
in business affairs.

To ascend a ladder, means prosperity and unstinted happiness.

To fall from one, denotes despondency and unsuccessful transactions
to the tradesman, and blasted crops to the farmer.

To see a broken ladder, betokens failure in every instance.

To descend a ladder, is disappointment in business, and unrequited desires.

To escape from captivity, or confinement, by means of a ladder,
you will be successful, though many perilous paths may intervene.

To grow dizzy as you ascend a ladder, denotes that you will not wear
new honors serenely.  You are likely to become haughty and domineering
in your newly acquired position.


[107] See Hill, Ascend, or Fall.

_Ladle_.

To see a ladle in your dreams, denotes you will be fortunate in the selection
of a companion.  Children will prove sources of happiness.

If the ladle is broken or uncleanly, you will have a grievous loss.

_Lagoon_.

To dream of a lagoon, denotes that you will be drawn into a whirlpool
of doubt and confusion through misapplication of your intelligence.

_Lake_.

For a young woman to dream that she is alone on a turbulent and muddy lake,
foretells many vicissitudes are approaching her, and she will regret
former extravagances, and disregard of virtuous teaching.

If the water gets into the boat, but by intense struggling she reaches
the boat-house safely, it denotes she will be under wrong persuasion,
but will eventually overcome it, and rise to honor and distinction.

It may predict the illness of some one near her.

If she sees a young couple in the same position as herself,
who succeed in rescuing themselves, she will find that some friend
has committed indiscretions, but will succeed in reinstating
himself in her favor.

To dream of sailing on a clear and smooth lake, with happy
and congenial companions, you will have much happiness,
and wealth will meet your demands.

A muddy lake, surrounded with bleak rocks and bare trees,
denotes unhappy terminations to business and affection.

A muddy lake, surrounded by green trees, portends that the moral in your
nature will fortify itself against passionate desires, and overcoming
the same will direct your energy into a safe and remunerative channel.
If the lake be clear and surrounded by barrenness, a profitable existence
will be marred by immoral and passionate dissipation.

To see yourself reflected in a clear lake, denotes coming joys
and many ardent friends.

To see foliaged trees reflected in the lake, you will enjoy to a satiety
Love's draught of passion and happiness.

To see slimy and uncanny inhabitants of the lake rise up and menace you,
denotes failure and ill health from squandering time, energy and health
on illicit pleasures.  You will drain the utmost drop of happiness,
and drink deeply of Remorse's bitter concoction.

_Lamb_.[108]

To dream of lambs frolicing{sic} in green pastures, betokens chaste
friendships and joys.  Bounteous and profitable crops to the farmers,
and increase of possessions for others.

To see a dead lamb, signifies sadness and desolation.

Blood showing on the white fleece of a lamb, denotes that innocent ones
will suffer from betrayal through the wrong doing of others.

A lost lamb, denotes that wayward people will be under your influence,
and you should be careful of your conduct.

To see lamb skins, denotes comfort and pleasure usurped from others.

To slaughter a lamb for domestic uses, prosperity will be gained
through the sacrifice of pleasure and contentment.

To eat lamb chops, denotes illness, and much anxiety over
the welfare of children.

To see lambs taking nourishment from their mothers, denotes happiness
through pleasant and intelligent home companions, and many lovable
and beautiful children.

To dream that dogs, or wolves devour lambs, innocent people will suffer
at the hands of insinuating and designing villains.

To hear the bleating of lambs, your generosity will be appealed to.

To see them in a winter storm, or rain, denotes disappointment
in expected enjoyment and betterment of fortune.

To own lambs in your dreams, signifies that your environments
will be pleasant and profitable.

If you carry lambs in your arms, you will be encumbered with
happy cares upon which you will lavish a wealth of devotion,
and no expense will be regretted in responding to appeals
from the objects of your affection.

To shear lambs, shows that you will be cold and mercenary.
You will be honest, but inhumane.

For a woman to dream that she is peeling the skin from a lamb,
and while doing so, she discovers that it is her child,
denotes that she will cause others sorrow which will also rebound
to her grief and loss.

          ``Fair prototype of innocence,
               Sleep upon thy emerald bed,
          No coming evil vents
               A shade above thy head.''


[108] See Sheep.

_Lame_.[109]

For a woman to dream of seeing any one lame, foretells that her pleasures
and hopes will be unfruitful and disappointing.


[109] See Cripple.

_Lament_.

To dream that you bitterly lament the loss of friends, or property,
signifies great struggles and much distress, from which will spring
causes for joy and personal gain.

To lament the loss of relatives, denotes sickness or disappointments,
which will bring you into closer harmony with companions, and will result
in brighter prospects for the future.

_Lamp_.

To see lamps filled with oil, denotes the demonstration of business activity,
from which you will receive gratifying results.

Empty lamps, represent depression and despondency.

To see lighted lamps burning with a clear flame, indicates merited rise
in fortune and domestic bliss.  If they give out a dull, misty radiance,
you will have jealousy and envy, coupled with suspicion, to combat,
in which you will be much pleased to find the right person to attack.

To drop a lighted lamp, your plans and hopes will abruptly
turn into failure.

If it explodes, former friends will unite with enemies in
damaging your interests.

Broken lamps, indicate the death of relatives or friends.

To light a lamp, denotes that you will soon make a change in your affairs,
which will lead to profit.

To carry a lamp, portends that you will be independent and
self-sustaining, preferring your own convictions above others.
If the light fails, you will meet with unfortunate conclusions,
and perhaps the death of friends or relatives.

If you are much affrighted, and throw a bewildering light from your window,
enemies will ensnare you with professions of friendship and interest
in your achievements.

To ignite your apparel from a lamp, you will sustain humiliation
from sources from which you expected encouragement and sympathy,
and your business will not be fraught with much good.

_Lamp-post_.

To see a lamp-post in your dreams, some stranger will prove your staunchiest
friend in time of pressing need.

To fall against a lamp-post, you will have deception to overcome,
or enemies will ensnare you.

To see a lamp-post across your path, you will have much adversity
in your life.

_Lance_.

To dream of a lance, denotes formidable enemies and injurious experiments.

To be wounded by a lance, error of judgment will cause you annoyance.

To break a lance, denotes seeming impossibilities will be overcome
and your desires will be fulfilled.

_Land_.[110]

To dream of land, when it appears fertile, omens good; but if sterile
and rocky, failure and dispondency is prognosticated.

To see land from the ocean, denotes that vast avenues of prosperity
and happiness will disclose themselves to you.

_Landau_.

To dream that you ride in a landau, with your friend or sweetheart,
denotes that incidents of a light, but pleasant character will pass
in rapid succession through your life.

If the vehicle is overturned, then pleasure will abruptly turn into woe.


[110] See Fields ant Earth.

_Lantern_.

To dream of seeing a lantern going before you in the darkness,
signifies unexpected affluence.  If the lantern is suddenly lost
to view, then your success will take an unfavorable turn.

To carry a lantern in your dreams, denotes that your benevolence will win you
many friends.  If it goes out, you fail to gain the prominence you wish.
If you stumble and break it, you will seek to aid others, and in so doing
lose your own station, or be disappointed in some undertaking.

To clean a lantern, signifies great possibilities are open to you.

To lose a lantern, means business depression, and disquiet in the home.

If you buy a lantern, it signifies fortunate deals.

For a young woman to dream that she lights her lover's lantern,
foretells for her a worthy man, and a comfortable home.
If she blows it out, by her own imprudence she will lose a chance
of getting married.

_Lap_.

To dream of sitting on some person's lap, denotes pleasant security
from vexing engagements.  If a young woman dreams that she is holding
a person on her lap, she will be exposed to unfavorable criticism.

To see a serpent in her lap, foretells she is threatened with
humiliation at the hands of enemies.  If she sees a cat in her lap,
she will be endangered by a seductive enemy.

_Lap-dog_.

To dream of a lap-dog, foretells you will be succored by friends
in some approaching dilemma If it be thin and ill-looking, there
will be distressing occurrences to detract from your prospects.

_Lap-robe_.

To dream of a lap-robe, indicates suspicious engagements will place
you under the surveillance of enemies or friends.

To lose one, your actions will be condemned by enemies to injure your affairs.

_Lard_.

To dream of lard, signifies a rise in fortune will soon gratify you.
For a woman to find her hand in melted lard, foretells her disappointment
in attempting to rise in social circles.

_Lark_.

To see larks flying, denotes high aims and purposes through the attainment
of which you will throw off selfishness and cultivate kindly graces of mind.

To hear them singing as they fly, you will be very happy in a new change
of abode, and business will flourish.

To see them fall to the earth and singing as they fall, despairing gloom
will overtake you in pleasure's bewildering delights.

A wounded or dead lark, portends sadness or death.

To kill a lark, portends injury to innocence through wantonness.

If they fly around and light on you, Fortune will turn her promising
countenance towards you.

To catch them in traps, you will win honor and love easily.

To see them eating, denotes a plentiful harvest.

_Latch_.

To dream of a latch, denotes you will meet urgent appeals for aid,
to which you will respond unkindly.  To see a broken latch,
foretells disagreements with your dearest friend.
Sickness is also foretold in this dream.

_Latin_.

To dream of studying this language, denotes victory and distinction
in your efforts to sustain your opinion on subjects of grave interest
to the public welfare.

_Laudanum_.

To dream that you take laudanum, signifies weakness of your own;
and that you will have a tendency to be unduly influenced by others.
You should cultivate determination.

To prevent others from taking this drug, indicates that you
will be the means of conveying great joy and good to people.

To see your lover taking laudanum through disappointment,
signifies unhappy affairs and the loss of a friend.

To give it, slight ailments will attack some member of your domestic circle.

_Laughing_.

To dream that you laugh and feel cheerful, means success in your undertakings,
and bright companions socially.

Laughing immoderately at some weird object, denotes disappointment and lack
of harmony in your surroundings.

To hear the happy laughter of children, means joy and health
to the dreamer.

To laugh at the discomfiture of others, denotes that you will wilfully
injure your friends to gratify your own selfish desires.

To hear mocking laughter, denotes illness and disappointing affairs.

_Laundry_.

To dream of laundering clothes, denotes struggles, but a final victory
in winning fortune.  If the clothes are done satisfactorily, then your
endeavors will bring complete happiness.  If they come out the reverse,
your fortune will fail to procure pleasure.

To see pretty girls at this work, you will seek pleasure out of your rank.

If a laundryman calls at your house, you are in danger of sickness,
or of losing something very valuable.

To see laundry wagons, portends rivalry and contention.

_Laurel_.

Dreaming of the laurel, brings success and fame.  You will acquire
new possessions in love.  Enterprises will be laden with gain.

For a young woman to wreath laurel about her lover's head,
denotes that she will have a faithful man, and one of fame
to woo her.

_Law and Lawsuits_.[111]

To dream of engaging in a lawsuit, warns you of enemies who are
poisoning public opinion against you.  If you know that the suit
is dishonest on your part, you will seek to dispossess true owners
for your own advancement.

If a young man is studying law, he will make rapid rise
in any chosen profession.

For a woman to dream that she engages in a law suit, means she
will be calumniated, and find enemies among friends.


[111] See Judge and Jury.

_Lawns_.

To dream of walking upon well-kept lawns, denotes occasions for joy
and great prosperity.

To join a merry party upon a lawn, denotes many secular amusements,
and business engagements will be successfully carried on.

For a young woman to wait upon a green lawn for the coming of a friend
or lover, denotes that her most ardent wishes concerning wealth and
marriage will be gratified.  If the grass be dead and the lawn marshy,
quarrels and separation may be expected.

To see serpents crawling in the grass before you, betrayal and cruel
insinuations will fill you with despair.

_Lawyer_.[112]

For a young woman to dream that she is connected in any way with a lawyer,
foretells that she will unwittingly commit indiscretions, which will subject
her to unfavorable and mortifying criticism.


[112] See Attorney.

_Lazy_.

To dream of feeling lazy, or acting so, denotes you will make a mistake
in the formation of enterprises, and will suffer keen disappointment.

For a young woman to think her lover is lazy, foretells she will have bad luck
in securing admiration.  Her actions will discourage men who mean marriage.

_Lead_.

To dream of lead, foretells poor success in any engagement.

A lead mine, indicates that your friends will look with suspicion
on your money making.  Your sweetheart will surprise you with her
deceit and ill temper.

To dream of lead ore, foretells distress and accidents.
Business will assume a gloomy cast.

To hunt for lead, denotes discontentment, and a constant
changing of employment.

To melt lead, foretells that by impatience you will bring failure
upon yourself and others.

_Leaking_.

To dream of seeing a leak in anything, is usually significant
of loss and vexations.

_Leaping_.[113]

For a young woman to dream of leaping over an obstruction, denotes that she
will gain her desires after much struggling and opposition.


[113] See Jumping.

_Learning_.

To dream of learning, denotes that you will take great interest
in acquiring knowledge, and if you are economical of your time,
you will advance far into the literary world.

To enter halls, or places of learning, denotes rise from obscurity,
and finance will be a congenial adherent.

To see learned men, foretells that your companions will be
interesting and prominent.

For a woman to dream that she is associated in any way with learned people,
she will be ambitious and excel in her endeavors to rise into prominence.

_Leather_.

To dream of leather, denotes successful business and favorable
engagements with women.  You will go into lucky speculations
if you dream that you are dressed in leather.

Ornaments of leather, denotes faithfulness in love and to the home.

Piles of leather, denotes fortune and happiness.

To deal in leather, signifies no change in the disposition of your engagements
is necessary for successful accumulation of wealth.

_Leaves_.

To dream of leaves, denotes happiness and wonderful improvement
in your business.

Withered leaves, indicate false hopes and gloomy forebodings will harass
your spirit into a whirlpool of despondency and loss.

If a young woman dreams of withered leaves, she will be left lonely
on the road to conjugality.  Death is sometimes implied.

If the leaves are green and fresh, she will come into a legacy
and marry a wealthy and prepossessing husband.

_Ledger_.

To dream of keeping a ledger, you will have perplexities and disappointing
conditions to combat.

To dream that you make wrong entries on your ledger, you will have small
disputes and a slight loss will befall you.

To put a ledger into a safe, you will be able to protect your rights
under adverse circumstances.

To get your ledger misplaced, your interests will go awry through
neglect of duty.

To dream that your ledger gets destroyed by fire, you will suffer
through the carelessness of friends.

To dream that you have a woman to keep your ledger, you will lose
money trying to combine pleasure with business.

For a young woman to dream of ledgers, denotes she will have a solid
business man to make her a proposal of marriage.

To dream that your ledger has worthless accounts, denotes bad
management and losses; but if the accounts are good, then your
business will assume improved conditions.

_Leeches_.

To dream of leeches, foretells that enemies will run over your interests.

If they are applied to you for medicinal purposes, you will have a serious
illness tn your family (if you escape yourself).

To see them applied to others, denotes sickness or trouble to friends.

If they should bite you, there is danger for you in unexpected places,
and you should heed well this warning.

_Leeward_.

To dream of sailing leeward, denotes to the sailor a prosperous
and merry voyage.  To others, a pleasant journey.

_Legerdemain_.

To dream of practising legerdemain, or seeing others doing so,
signifies you will be placed in a position where your energy
and power of planning will be called into strenuous play
to extricate yourself.

_Legislature_.

To dream that you are a member of a legislature, foretells you will be
vain of your possessions and will treat members of your family unkindly.
You will have no real advancement.

_Legs_.

If you dream of admiring well-shaped feminine legs, you will lose
your judgment, and act very silly over some fair charmer.

To see misshapen legs, denotes unprofitable occupations
and ill-tempered comrades.

A wounded leg, foretells losses and agonizing attacks of malaria.

To dream that you have a wooden leg, denotes that you will bemean
yourself in a false way to your friends.

If ulcers are on your legs, it signifies a drain on your income
to aid others.

To dream that you have three, or more, legs, indicates that more enterprises
are planned in your imagination than will ever benefit you.

If you can't use your legs, it portends poverty.

To have a leg amputated, you will lose valued friends, and the home
influence will render life unbearable.

For a young woman to admire her own legs, denotes vanity, and she
will be repulsed by the man she admires.  If she has hairy legs,
she will dominate her husband.

If your own legs are clean and well shaped, it denotes a happy future
and devoted friends.

_Lemonade_.

If you drink lemonade in a dream, you will concur with others
in signifying some entertainment as a niggardly device to raise
funds for the personal enjoyment of others at your expense.

_Lemons_.

To dream of seeing lemons on their native trees among rich foliage,
denotes jealousy toward some beloved object, but demonstrations
will convince you of the absurdity of the charge.

To eat lemons, foretells humiliation and disappointments.

Green lemons, denotes sickness and contagion.

To see shriveled lemons, denotes divorce, if married,
and separation, to lovers.

_Lending_.

To dream that you are lending money, foretells difficulties in meeting
payments of debts and unpleasant influence in private.

To lend other articles, denotes impoverishment through generosity.

To refuse to lend things, you will be awake to your interests
and keep the respect of friends.

For others to offer to lend you articles, or money, denotes prosperity
and close friendships.

_Lentil_.

If you dream of lentils, it denotes quarrels and unhealthy surroundings.
For a young woman, this dream portends dissatisfaction with her lover,
but parental advice will cause her to accept the inevitable.

_Leopard_.

To dream of a leopard attacking you, denotes that while the future seemingly
promises fair, success holds many difficulties through misplaced confidence.

To kill one, intimates victory in your affairs.

To see one caged, denotes that enemies will surround but fail
to injure you.

To see leopards in their native place trying to escape from you,
denotes that you will be embarrassed in business or love,
but by persistent efforts you will overcome difficulties.

To dream of a leopard's skin, denotes that your interests will be endangered
by a dishonest person who will win your esteem.

_Leprosy_.

To dream that you are infected with this dread disease, foretells sickness,
by which you will lose money and incur the displeasure of others.

If you see others afflicted thus, you will meet discouraging
prospects and love will turn into indifference.

_Letter_.

To dream that you see a registered letter, foretells that some money
matters will disrupt long-established relations.

For a young woman to dream that she receives such a letter,
intimates that she will be offered a competency, but it will
not be on strictly legal, or moral grounds; others may play
towards her a dishonorable part.

To the lover, this bears heavy presentments of disagreeable mating.
His sweetheart will covet other gifts than his own.

To dream of an anonymous letter, denotes that you will receive injury
from an unsuspected source.

To write one, foretells that you will be jealous of a rival,
whom you admit to be your superior.

To dream of getting letters bearing unpleasant news, denotes difficulties
or illness.  If the news is of a joyous character, you will have many
things to be thankful for.  If the letter is affectionate, but is written
on green, or colored, paper, you will be slighted in love and business.
Despondency will envelop you.  Blue ink, denotes constancy and affection,
also bright fortune.

Red colors in a letter, imply estrangements through suspicion and jealousy,
but this may be overcome by wise maneuvering of the suspected party.

If a young woman dreams that she receives a letter from her lover and places
it near her heart, she will be worried very much by a good-looking rival.
Truthfulness is often rewarded with jealousy.

If you fail to read the letter, you will lose something either
in a business or social way.

Letters nearly always bring worry.

To have your letter intercepted, rival enemies are working to defame you.

To dream of trying to conceal a letter from your sweetheart or wife,
intimates that you are interested in unworthy occupations.

To dream of a letter with a black border, signifies distress
and the death of some relative.

To receive a letter written on black paper with white ink,
denotes that gloom and disappointment will assail you, and friendly
interposition will render small relief.  If the letter passes between
husband and wife, it means separation under sensational charges.
If lovers, look for quarrels and threats of suicide.
To business people, it denotes enviousness and covetousness.

To dream that you write a letter, denotes that you will be hasty
in condemning some one on suspicion, and regrets will follow.

A torn letter, indicates that hopeless mistakes may ruin your reputation.

To receive a letter by hand, denotes that you are acting ungenerously
towards your companions or sweetheart, and you also are not upright
in your dealings.

To dream often of receiving a letter from a friend, foretells his arrival,
or you will hear from him by letter or otherwise.

_Letter-carrier_.

If you dream of a letter-carrier coming with your letters, you will soon
receive news of an unwelcome and an unpleasant character.

To hear his whistle, denotes the unexpected arrival of a visitor.

If he passes without your mail, disappointment and sadness will befall you.

If you give him letters to mail, you will suffer injury through
envy or jealousy.

To converse with a letter-carrier, you will implicate yourself
in some scandalous proceedings.

_Letter-file_.

To see a letter-file in your dreams, is significant of important news,
which will cause you an irksome journey.  For a woman, this dream implies
distressful news and unfaithful friends.

_Lettuce_.

To see lettuce growing green and thrifty, denotes that you will enjoy
some greatly desired good, after an unimportant embarrassment.

If you eat lettuce, illness will separate you from your lover or companion,
or perhaps it may be petty jealousy.

For a woman to dream of sowing lettuce, portends she will be the cause
of her own early sickness or death.

To gather it, denotes your superabundant sensitiveness,
and that your jealous disposition will cause you unmitigated
distress and pain.

To buy lettuce, denotes that you will court your own downfall.

_Liar_.

To dream of thinking people are liars, foretells you will lose
faith in some scheme which you had urgently put forward.
For some one to call you a liar, means you will have vexations
through deceitful persons.

For a woman to think her sweetheart a liar, warns her that her unbecoming
conduct is likely to lose her a valued friend.

_Library_.

To dream that you are in a library, denotes that you will grow
discontented with your environments and associations and seek
companionship in study and the exploration of ancient customs.

To find yourself in a library for other purpose than study,
foretells that your conduct will deceive your friends, and where
you would have them believe that you had literary aspirations,
you will find illicit assignations.

_Lice_.

A dream of lice contains much waking worry and distress.
It often implies offensive ailments.

Lice on stock, foretells famine and loss.

To have lice on your body, denotes that you will conduct yourself
unpleasantly with your acquaintances.

To dream of catching lice, foretells sickness, and that you
will cultivate morbidity.

_License_.

To dream of a license, is an omen of disputes and loss.
Married women will exasperate your cheerfulness.  For a woman
to see a marriage license, foretells that she will soon enter
unpleasant bonds, which will humiliate her pride.

_Life-boat_.

To dream of being in a life-boat, denotes escape from threatened evil.

To see a life-boat sinking, friends will contribute to your distress.

To be lost in a life-boat, you will be overcome with trouble,
in which your friends will be included to some extent.
If you are saved, you will escape a great calamity.

_Life-insurance Man_.

To see life-insurance men in a dream, means that you are soon
to meet a stranger who will contribute to your business interests,
and change in your home life is foreshadowed, as interests
will be mutual.

If they appear distorted or unnatural, the dream is more
unfortunate than good.

_Light_.

If you dream of light, success will attend you.  To dream of weird light,
or if the light goes out, you will be disagreeably surprised by some
undertaking resulting in nothing.

To see a dim light, indicates partial success.

_Lighthouse_.

If you see a lighthouse through a storm, difficulties and grief will
assail you, but they will disperse before prosperity and happiness.

To see a lighthouse from a placid sea, denotes calm joys
and congenial friends.

_Lightning_.

Lightning in your dreams, foreshadows happiness and prosperity
of short duration.

If the lightning strikes some object near you, and you feel
the shock, you will be damaged by the good fortune of a friend,
or you may be worried by gossipers and scandalmongers.

To see livid lightning parting black clouds, sorrow and difficulties
will follow close on to fortune.

If it strikes you, unexpected sorrows will overwhelm you in business or love.

To see the lightning above your head, heralds the advent of joy and gain.

To see lightning in the south, fortune will hide herself from you for awhile.

If in the southwest, luck will come your way.  In the west,
your prospects will be brighter than formally.  In the north,
obstacles will have to be removed before your prospects will
brighten up.  If in the east, you will easily win favors and fortune.
Lightning from dark and ominous-looking clouds, is always
a forerunner of threats, of loss and of disappointments.
Business men should stay close to business, and women near
their husbands or mothers; children and the sick should be
looked after closely.

_Lightning-rod_.

To see a lightning-rod, denotes that threatened destruction to some
cherished work will confront you.  To see one change into a serpent,
foretells enemies will succeed in their schemes against you.
If the lightning strikes one, there will be an accident or sudden
news to give you sorrow.

If you are having one put up, it is a warning to beware how you begin
a new enterprise, as you will likely be overtaken by disappointment.

To have them taken down, you will change your plans and
thereby further your interests.  To see many lightning rods,
indicates a variety of misfortunes.

_Lily_.

To dream of a lily, denotes much chastisement through illness and death.
To see lilies growing with their rich foliage, denotes early marriage
to the young and subsequent separation through death.

To see little children among the flowers, indicates sickness
and fragile constitutions to these little ones.

For a young woman to dream of admiring, or gathering, lilies,
denotes much sadness coupled with joy, as the one she loves
will have great physical suffering, if not an early dissolution.
If she sees them withered, sorrow is even nearer than she
could have suspected.

To dream that you breathe the fragrance of lilies, denotes that sorrow
will purify and enhance your mental qualities.

_Lime_.

To dream of lime, foretells that disaster will prostrate you for a time,
but you will revive to greater and richer prosperity than before.

_Lime-kiln_.

To dream of a lime-kiln, foretells the immediate future holds
no favor for speculations in love or business

_Limes_.

To dream of eating limes, foretells continued sickness and adverse straits.

_Limp_.[114]

To dream that you limp in your walk, denotes that a small worry will
unexpectedly confront you, detracting much from your enjoyment.

To see others limping, signifies that you will be naturally offended
at the conduct of a friend.  Small failures attend this dream.


[114] See Cripple and Lamed.

_Linen_.

To see linen in your dream, augurs prosperity and enjoyment.

If a person appears to you dressed in linen garments, you will shortly
be the recipient of joyful tidings in the nature of an inheritance.

If you are apparelled in clean, fine linen, your fortune and fullest
enjoyment in life is assured.  If it be soiled, sorrow and ill luck
will be met with occasionally, mingled with the good in your life.

_Linseed Oil_.

To see linseed oil in your dreams, denotes your impetuous extravagance
will be checked by the kindly interference of a friend.

_Lion_.

To dream of a lion, signifies that a great force is driving you.

If you subdue the lion, you will be victorious in any engagement.

If it overpowers you, then you will be open to the successful
attacks of enemies.

To see caged lions, denotes that your success depends upon your ability
to cope with opposition.

To see a man controlling a lion in its cage, or out denotes
success in business and great mental power.  You will be favorably
regarded by women.

To see young lions, denotes new enterprises, which will bring
success if properly attended.

For a young woman to dream of young lions, denotes new and fascinating lovers.

For a woman to dream that she sees Daniel in the lions' den, signifies that by
her intellectual qualifications and personal magnetism she will win fortune
and lovers to her highest desire.

To hear the roar of a lion, signifies unexpected advancement
and preferment with women.

To see a lion's head over you, showing his teeth by snarls,
you are threatened with defeat in your upward rise to power.

To see a lion's skin, denotes a rise to fortune and happiness.

To ride one, denotes courage and persistency in surmounting difficulties.

To dream you are defending your children from a lion with a
pen-knife, foretells enemies will threaten to overpower you,
and will well nigh succeed if you allow any artfulness to persuade
you for a moment from duty and business obligations.

_Lips_.

To dream of thick, unsightly lips, signifies disagreeable encounters,
hasty decision, and ill temper in the marriage relation.

Full, sweet, cherry lips, indicates harmony and affluence.
To a lover, it augurs reciprocation in love, and fidelity.

Thin lips, signifies mastery of the most intricate subjects.

Sore, or swollen lips, denotes privations and unhealthful desires.

_Liquor_.

To dream of buying liquor, denotes selfish usurpation of property upon
which you have no legal claim If you sell it, you will be criticised
for niggardly benevolence.

To drink some, you will come into doubtful possession of wealth,
but your generosity will draw around you convivial friends,
and women will seek to entrance and hold you.

To see liquor in barrels, denotes prosperity, but unfavorable
tendency toward making home pleasant.

If in bottles, fortune will appear in a very tangible form.

For a woman to dream of handling, or drinking liquor,
foretells for her a happy Bohemian kind of existence.
She will be good natured but shallow minded.  To treat others,
she will be generous to rivals, and the indifference of lovers
or husband will not seriously offset her pleasures or contentment.

_Liver_.

To dream of a disordered liver, denotes a querulous person will be your mate,
and fault-finding will occupy her time, and disquiet will fill your hours.

To dream of eating liver, indicates that some deceitful person
has installed himself in the affection of your sweetheart.

_Lizard_.

To dream of lizards, foretells attacks upon you by enemies.

If you kill a lizard, you will regain your lost reputation or fortune;
but if it should escape, you will meet vexations and crosses
in love and business.

For a woman to dream that a lizard crawls up her skirt,
or scratches her, she will have much misfortune and sorrow.
Her husband will be a victim to invalidism and she will be left
a widow, and little sustenance will be eked out by her own labors.

_Load_.

To dream that you carry a load, signifies a long existence filled
with labors of love and charity.

To fall under a load, denotes your inability to attain comforts
that are necessary to those looking to you for subsistence.

To see others thus engaged, denotes trials for them in which you
will be interested.

_Loadstone_.

To dream of a loadstone, denotes you will make favorable
opportunities for your own advancement in a material way.
For a young woman to think a loadstone is attracting her,
is an omen of happy changes in her family.

_Loaves_.

To dream of loaves of bread, denotes frugality.  If they be of cake,
the dreamer has cause to rejoice over his good fortune, as love
and wealth will wait obsequiously upon you.

Broken loaves, bring discontent and bickerings between those who love.

To see loaves multiply phenomenally, prognosticates great success.
Lovers will be happy in their chosen ones.

_Lobster_.

To dream of seeing lobsters, denotes great favors, and riches
will endow you.

If you eat them, you will sustain contamination by associating too freely
with pleasure-seeking people.

If the lobsters are made into a salad, success will not change
your generous nature, but you will enjoy to the fullest your
ideas of pleasure.

To order a lobster, you will hold prominent positions and
command many subordinates.

_Lock_.

To dream of a lock, denotes bewilderment.  If the lock works at your command,
or efforts, you will discover that some person is working you injury.
If you are in love, you will find means to aid you in overcoming a rival;
you will also make a prosperous journey.

If the lock resists your efforts, you will be derided and scorned
in love and perilous voyages will bring to you no benefit.

To put a lock upon your fiance'e's neck and arm, foretells that you
are distrustful of her fidelity, but future episodes will disabuse
your mind of doubt.

_Locket_.

If a young woman dreams that her lover places a locket around
her neck, she will be the recipient of many beautiful offerings,
and will soon be wedded, and lovely children will crown her life.
If she should lose a locket, death will throw sadness into her life.

If a lover dreams that his sweetheart returns his locket,
he will confront disappointing issues.  The woman he loves will
worry him and conduct herself in a displeasing way toward him.

If a woman dreams that she breaks a locket, she will have a changeable
and unstable husband, who will dislike constancy in any form,
be it business or affection,

_Lockjaw_.

To dream that you have lockjaw, signifies there is trouble ahead
for you, as some person is going to betray your confidence.
For a woman to see others with lockjaw, foretells her friends will
unconsciously detract from her happiness by assigning her unpleasant tasks.
If stock have it, you will lose a friend.

_Locomotive_.

To dream of a locomotive running with great speed, denotes a rapid rise
in fortune, and foreign travel.  If it is disabled, then many vexations
will interfere with business affairs, and anticipated journeys will be laid
aside through the want of means.

To see one completely demolished, signifies great distress
and loss of property.

To hear one coming, denotes news of a foreign nature.
Business will assume changes that will mean success to all classes.

To hear it whistle, you will be pleased and surprised at the appearance
of a friend who has been absent, or an unexpected offer, which means
preferment to you.

_Locust_.

To dream of locusts, foretells discrepancies will be found
in your business, for which you will worry and suffer.
For a woman, this dream foretells she will bestow her affections
upon ungenerous people.

_Lodger_.

For a woman to dream that she has lodgers, foretells she will
be burdened with unpleasant secrets.  If one goes away without
paying his bills, she will have unexpected trouble with men.
For one to pay his bill, omens favor and accumulation of money.

_Looking-glass_.[115]

For a woman to dream of a looking-glass, denotes that she is soon
to be confronted with shocking deceitfulness and discrepancies,
which may result in tragic scenes or separations.


[115] See Mirror.

_Loom_.

To dream of standing by and seeing a loom operated by a stranger, denotes much
vexation and useless irritation from the talkativeness of those about you.
Some disappointment with happy expectations are coupled with this dream.

To see good-looking women attending the loom, denotes unqualified success
to those in love.  It predicts congenial pursuits to the married.
It denotes you are drawing closer together in taste.

For a woman to dream of weaving on an oldtime loom, signifies that she
will have a thrifty husband and beautiful children will fill her life
with happy solicitations.

To see an idle loom, denotes a sulky and stubborn person,
who will cause you much anxious care.

_Lord's Prayer_.

To dream of repeating the Lord's Prayer, foretells that you are threatened
with secret foes and will need the alliance and the support of friends
to tide you over difficulties.

To hear others repeat it, denotes the danger of some friend.

_Lottery_.

To dream of a lottery, and that you are taking great interest
in the drawing, you will engage in some worthless enterprise,
which will cause you to make an unpropitious journey.
If you hold the lucky number, you will gain in a speculation
which will perplex and give you much anxiety.

To see others winning in a lottery, denotes convivialities and amusements,
bringing many friends together.

If you lose in a lottery, you will be the victim of designing persons.
Gloomy depressions in your affairs will result.

For a young woman to dream of a lottery in any way, denotes that
her careless way of doing things will bring her disappointment,
and a husband who will not be altogether reliable or constant.

To dream of a lottery, denotes you will have unfavorable friendships
in business.  Your love affairs will produce temporary pleasure.

_Louse_.[116]

To dream of a louse, foretells that you will have uneasy feelings regarding
your health, and an enemy will give you exasperating vexation.


[116] See Lice.

_Love_.

To dream of loving any object, denotes satisfaction with
your present environments.

To dream that the love of others fills you with happy forebodings,
successful affairs will give you contentment and freedom from the anxious
cares of life.  If you find that your love fails, or is not reciprocated,
you will become despondent over some conflicting question arising in your
mind as to whether it is best to change your mode of living or to marry
and trust fortune for the future advancement of your state.

For a husband or wife to dream that their companion is loving,
foretells great happiness around the hearthstone, and bright
children will contribute to the sunshine of the home.

To dream of the love of parents, foretells uprightness in character
and a continual progress toward fortune and elevation.

The love of animals, indicates contentment with what you possess,
though you may not think so.  For a time, fortune will crown you.

_Lovely_.

Dreaming of lovely things, brings favor to all persons connected with you.

For a lover to dream that his sweetheart is lovely of person and character,
foretells for him a speedy and favorable marriage.

If through the vista of dreams you see your own fair loveliness,
fate bids you, with a gleaming light, awake to happiness.

_Lozenges_.

To dream of lozenges, foretells success in small matters.
For a woman to eat or throw them away, foretells her life
will be harassed by little spites from the envious.

_Lucky_.

To dream of being lucky, is highly favorable to the dreamer.
Fulfilment of wishes may be expected and pleasant duties will
devolve upon you.

To the despondent, this dream forebodes an uplifting and a
renewal of prosperity.

_Luggage_.

To dream of luggage, denotes unpleasant cares.  You will be encumbered
with people who will prove distasteful to you.

If you are carrying your own luggage, you will be so full of your own
distresses that you will be blinded to the sorrows of others.

To lose your luggage, denotes some unfortunate speculation or family
dissensions To the unmarried, it foretells broken engagements.

_Lumber_.

To dream of lumber, denotes many difficult tasks and but little
remuneration or pleasure.

To see piles of lumber burning, indicates profit from an unexpected source.

To dream of sawing lumber, denotes unwise transactions and unhappiness.

_Lute_.

To dream of playing on one, is auspicious of joyful news from absent friends.

Pleasant occupations follow the dreaming of hearing the music
of a lute.

_Luxury_.

To dream that you are surrounded by luxury, indicates much wealth,
but dissipation and love of self will reduce your income.

For a poor woman to dream that she enjoys much luxury, denotes an early
change in her circumstances.

_Lying_.

To dream that you are lying to escape punishment, denotes that you will act
dishonorably towards some innocent person.

Lying to protect a friend from undeserved chastisement, denotes that
you will have many unjust criticisms passed upon your conduct,
but you will rise above them and enjoy prominence.

To hear others lying, denotes that they are seeking to entrap you.  Lynx.

To dream of seeing a lynx, enemies are undermining your business
and disrupting your home affairs.  For a woman, this dream indicates
that she has a wary woman rivaling her in the affections of her lover.
If she kills the lynx, she will overcome her rival.

_Lyre_.

To dream of listening to the music of a lyre, foretells chaste pleasures
and congenial companionship.  Business will run smoothly.

For a young woman to dream of playing on one, denotes that she will enjoy
the undivided affection of a worthy man.



M.

``_And they dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream in one night,
each man according to his interpretation of his dream, the butler
and the baker of the King of Egypt, which were bound in the prison_.''--
Gen. xl., 5.

_Macadamize_.

To dream that you see or travel on a macadamized road, is significant
of pleasant journeys, from which you will derive much benefit.
For young people, this dream foretells noble aspirations.

_Macaroni_.

To dream of eating macaroni, denotes small losses.  To see it in large
quantities, denotes that you will save money by the strictest economy.
For a young woman, this dream means that a stranger will enter her life.

_Machinery_.

To dream of machinery, denotes you will undertake some project
which will give great anxiety, but which will finally result
in good for you.

To see old machinery, foretells enemies will overcome in your strivings
to build up your fortune.  To become entangled in machinery, foretells loss
in your business, and much unhappiness will follow.

Loss from bad deals generally follows this dream.

_Mad Dog_.[117]

To dream of seeing a mad dog, denotes that enemies will make scurrilous
attacks upon you and your friends, but if you succeed in killing the dog,
you will overcome adverse opinions and prosper greatly in a financial way.


[117] See Dog.

_Madness_.

To dream of being mad, shows trouble ahead for the dreamer.
Sickness, by which you will lose property, is threatened.

To see others suffering under this malady, denotes inconstancy of friends
and gloomy ending of bright expectations.

For a young woman to dream of madness, foretells disappointment
in marriage and wealth.

_Madstone_.

To see a madstone applied to a wound from the fangs of some mad animal,
denotes that you will endeavor, to the limits of your energy,
to shield self from the machinations of enemies, which will soon
envelop you with the pall of dishonorable defeat.

_Magic_.

To dream of accomplishing any design by magic, indicates pleasant surprises.

To see others practising this art, denotes profitable changes
to all who have this dream.

To dream of seeing a magician, denotes much interesting travel
to those concerned in the advancement of higher education,
and profitable returns to the mercenary.

Magic here should not be confounded with sorcery or spiritism.  If the reader
so interprets, he may expect the opposite to what is here forecast to follow.
True magic is the study of the higher truths of Nature.

_Magistrate_.[118]

To dream of a magistrate, foretells that you will be harassed
with threats of law suits and losses in your business.


[118] See Judge and Jury.

_Magnet_.

To dream of a magnet, denotes that evil influences will draw you
from the path of honor.  A woman is probably luring you to ruin.
To a woman, this dream foretells that protection and wealth will
be showered upon her.

_Magnifying-glass_.

To look through a magnifying-glass in your dreams,
means failure to accomplish your work in a satisfactory manner.
For a woman to think she owns one, foretells she will encourage
the attention of persons who will ignore her later.

_Magpie_.

To dream of a magpie, denotes much dissatisfaction and quarrels.
The dreamer should guard well his conduct and speech after this dream.

_Malice_.

To dream of entertaining malice for any person, denotes that you will
stand low in the opinion of friends because of a disagreeable temper.
Seek to control your passion.

If you dream of persons maliciously using you, an enemy in friendly
garb is working you harm.

_Mallet_.

To dream of a mallet, denotes you will meet unkind treatment from friends
on account of your ill health.  Disorder in the home is indicated.

_Malt_.

To dream of malt, betokens a pleasant existence and riches
that will advance your station.

To dream of taking malted drinks, denotes that you will interest yourself
in some dangerous affair, but will reap much benefit therefrom.

_Man_.

To dream of a man, if handsome, well formed and supple, denotes that
you will enjoy life vastly and come into rich possessions.
If he is misshapen and sour-visaged, you will meet disappointments
and many perplexities will involve you.

For a woman to dream of a handsome man, she is likely to have distinction
offered her.  If he is ugly, she will experience trouble through some one whom
she considers a friend.

_Manners_.

To dream of seeing ugly-mannered persons, denotes failure to carry
out undertakings through the disagreeableness of a person connected
with the affair.

If you meet people with affable manners, you will be pleasantly surprised
by affairs of moment with you taking a favorable turn.

_Man-of-war_.

To dream of a man-of-war, denotes long journeys and separation from country
and friends, dissension in political affairs is portended.

If she is crippled, foreign elements will work damage to home interests.

If she is sailing upon rough seas, trouble with foreign powers
may endanger private affairs.

Personal affairs may also go awry.

_Mansion_.

To dream that you are in a mansion where there is a haunted chamber,
denotes sudden misfortune in the midst of contentment.

To dream of being in a mansion, indicates for you wealthy possessions.

To see a mansion from distant points, foretells future advancement.

_Manslaughter_.[119]

For a woman to dream that she sees, or is in any way connected with,
manslaughter, denotes that she will be desperately scared lest her name
be coupled with some scandalous sensation.


[119] See Murder.

_Mantilla_.

To dream of seeing a mantilla, denotes an unwise enterprise which will bring
you into unfavorable notice.

_Manufactory_.[120]

To dream of a large manufactory, denotes unusual activity
in business circles.


[120] See Factory.

_Manure_.

To dream of seeing manure, is a favorable omen.  Much good will follow
the dream.  Farmers especially will feel a rise in fortune.

_Manuscript_.

To dream of manuscript in an unfinished state, forebodes disappointment.
If finished and clearly written, great hopes will be realized.

If you are at work on manuscript, you will have many fears for some
cherished hope, but if you keep the blurs out of your work you will
succeed in your undertakings.  If it is rejected by the publishers,
you will be hopeless for a time, but eventually your most sanguine
desires will become a reality.

If you lose it, you will be subjected to disappointment.

If you see it burn, some work of your own will bring you profit
and much elevation.

_Map_.

To dream of a map, or studying one, denotes a change will be contemplated
in your business.  Some disappointing things will occur, but much profit
also will follow the change.

To dream of looking for one, denotes that a sudden discontent
with your surroundings will inspire you with new energy,
and thus you will rise into better conditions.  For a young woman,
this dream denotes that she will rise into higher spheres
by sheer ambition.

_Marble_.

To dream of a marble quarry, denotes that you life will be
a financial success, but that your social surroundings will be
devoid of affection.

To dream of polishing marble, you will come into a pleasing inheritance.

To see it broken, you will fall into disfavor among your associates
by defying all moral codes.

_March_.

To dream of marching to the strains of music, indicates that you
are ambitious to become a soldier or a public official, but you
should consider all things well before making final decision.

For women to dream of seeing men marching, foretells their inclination
for men in public positions.  They should be careful of their reputations,
should they be thrown much with men.

To dream of the month of March, portends disappointing returns in business,
and some woman will be suspicious of your honesty.

_Mare_.[121]

To dream of seeing mares in pastures, denotes success in
business and congenial companions.  If the pasture is barren,
it foretells poverty, but warm friends.  For a young woman,
this omens a happy marriage and beautiful children.


[121] See Horse.

_Marigold_.

To dream of seeing marigolds, denotes contentment with frugality
should be your aim.

_Mariner_.

To dream that you are a mariner, denotes a long journey to distant countries,
and much pleasure will be connected with the trip.

If you see your vessel sailing without you, much personal discomfort
will be wrought you by rivals.

_Market_.

To dream that you are in a market, denotes thrift and much activity
in all occupations.

To see an empty market, indicates depression and gloom.

To see decayed vegetables or meat, denotes losses in business.

For a young woman, a market foretells pleasant changes.

_Marmalade_.

To dream of eating marmalade, denotes sickness and much dissatisfaction

For a young woman to dream of making it, denotes unhappy
domestic associations.

_Marmot_.

To dream of seeing a marmot, denotes that sly enemies are approaching
you in the shape of fair women.

For a young woman to dream of a marmot, foretells that temptation
will beset her in the future.

_Marriage_.[122]

For a woman to dream that she marries an old, decrepit man, wrinkled face
and gray headed, denotes she will have a vast amount of trouble and sickness
to encounter.  If, while the ceremony is in progress, her lover passes,
wearing black and looking at her in a reproachful way, she will be driven
to desperation by the coldness and lack of sympathy of a friend.

To dream of seeing a marriage, denotes high enjoyment,
if the wedding guests attend in pleasing colors and are happy;
if they are dressed in black or other somber hues, there will
be mourning and sorrow in store for the dreamer.

If you dream of contracting a marriage, you will have unpleasant news
from the absent.

If you are an attendant at a wedding, you will experience much
pleasure from the thoughtfulness of loved ones, and business
affairs will be unusually promising.

To dream of any unfortunate occurrence in connection with a marriage,
foretells distress, sickness, or death in your family.

For a young woman to dream that she is a bride, and unhappy or indifferent,
foretells disappointments in love, and probably her own sickness.
She should be careful of her conduct, as enemies are near her.


[122] See Bride.

_Mars_.

To dream of Mars, denotes that your life will be made miserable
and hardly worth living by the cruel treatment of friends.
Enemies will endeavor to ruin you.

If you feel yourself drawn up toward the planet, you will develop keen
judgment and advance beyond your friends in learning and wealth.

_Marsh_.

To dream of walking through marshy places, denotes illness resulting
from overwork and worry.  You will suffer much displeasure from the unwise
conduct of a near relative.

_Martyr_.

To dream of martyrs, denotes that false friends, domestic unhappiness
and losses in affairs which concern you most.

To dream that you are a martyr, signifies the separation from friends,
and enemies will slander you.

_Mask_.

To dream that you are wearing a mask, denotes temporary trouble,
as your conduct towards some dear one will be misinterpreted,
and your endeavors to aid that one will be misunderstood,
but you will profit by the temporary estrangements.

To see others masking, denotes that you will combat falsehood and envy.

To see a mask in your dreams, denotes some person will be
unfaithful to you, and your affairs will suffer also.
For a young woman to dream that she wears a mask, foretells she
will endeavor to impose upon some friendly person.

If she unmasks, or sees others doing so, she will fail to gain
the admiration sought for.  She should demean herself modestly
after this dream.

_Mason_.

To dream that you see a mason plying his trade, denotes a rise
in your circumstances and a more congenial social atmosphere
will surround you.

If you dream of seeing a band of the order of masons in full regalia,
it denotes that you will have others beside yourself to protect and keep
from the evils of life.

_Masquerade_.

To dream of attending a masquerade, denotes that you will indulge in foolish
and harmful pleasures to the neglect of business and domestic duties.

For a young woman to dream that she participates in a masquerade,
denotes that she will be deceived.

_Mast_.

To dream of seeing the masts of ships, denotes long and pleasant voyages,
the making of many new friends, and the gaining of new possessions.

To see the masts of wrecked ships, denotes sudden changes in your
circumstances which will necessitate giving over anticipated pleasures.

If a sailor dreams of a mast, he will soon sail on an eventful trip.

_Master_.

To dream that you have a master, is a sign of incompetency on your part
to command others, and you will do better work under the leadership
of some strong-willed person.

If you are a master, and command many people under you,
you will excel in judgment in the fine points of life,
and will hold high positions and possess much wealth.

_Mat_.

Keep away from mats in your dreams, as they will usher you
into sorrow and perplexities.

_Match_.

To dream of matches, denotes prosperity and change when least expected.

To strike a match in the dark, unexpected news and fortune is foreboded.

_Matting_.

To dream of matting, foretells pleasant prospects and cheerful news
from the absent.  If it is old or torn, you will have vexing things
come before you.

_Mattress_.

To dream of a mattress, denotes that new duties and responsibilities
will shortly be assumed.

To sleep on a new mattress, signifies contentment with present surroundings.

To dream of a mattress factory, denotes that you will be connected
in business with thrifty partners and will soon amass wealth.

_Mausoleum_.

To dream of a mausoleum, indicates the sickness, death, or trouble
of some prominent friend.

To find yourself inside a mausoleum, foretells your own illness.

_May_.

To dream of the month of May, denotes prosperous times,
and pleasure for the young.

To dream that nature appears freakish, denotes sudden sorrow
and disappointment clouding pleasure.

_May Bugs_.

To dream of May bugs, denotes an ill-tempered companion where a congenial
one was expected.

_Meadow_.

To dream of meadows, predicts happy reunions under bright promises
of future prosperity.

_Meals_.[123]

To dream of meals, denotes that you will let trifling matters
interfere with momentous affairs and business engagements.


[123] See Eating.

_Measles_.

To dream that you have measles, denotes much worry, and anxious
care will interfere with your business affairs.

To dream that others have this disease, denotes that you will be troubled
over the condition of others.

_Meat_.[124]

For a woman to dream of raw meat, denotes that she will
meet with much discouragement in accomplishing her aims.
If she sees cooked meat, it denotes that others will obtain
the object for which she will strive.


[124] See Beef.

_Mechanic_.

To dream of a mechanic, denotes change in your dwelling place
and a more active business.  Advancement in wages usually follows
after seeing mechanics at work on machinery.

_Medal_.

To dream of medals, denotes honors gained by application and industry.

To lose a medal, denotes misfortune through the unfaithfulness of others.

_Medicine_.

To dream of medicine, if pleasant to the taste, a trouble will
come to you, but in a short time it will work for your good;
but if you take disgusting medicine, you will suffer a protracted
illness or some deep sorrow or loss will overcome you.

To give medicine to others, denotes that you will work to injure
some one who trusted you.

_Melancholy_.

To dream that you feel melancholy over any event, is a sign of disappointment
in what was thought to be favorable undertakings.

To dream that you see others melancholy, denotes unpleasant interruption
in affairs.  To lovers, it brings separation.

_Melon_.

To dream of melons, denotes ill health and unfortunate ventures in business.

To eat them, signifies that hasty action will cause you anxiety.

To see them growing on green vines, denotes that present troubles
will result in good fortune for you.

_Memorandum_.

To dream that you make memoranda, denotes that you will engage
in an unprofitable business, and much worry will result for you.

To see others making a memorandum, signifies that some person
will worry you with appeals for aid.

To lose your memorandum, you will experience a slight loss in trade.

To find a memorandum, you will assume new duties that will cause much
pleasure to others.

_Memorial_.

To dream of a memorial, signifies there will be occasion for you to show
patient kindness, as trouble and sickness threatens your relatives.

_Menagerie_.

To dream of visiting a menagerie, denotes various troubles.

_Mendicant_.

For a woman to dream of mendicants, she will meet with disagreeable
interferences in her plans for betterment and enjoyment.

_Mending_.

To dream of mending soiled garments, denotes that you will undertake
to right a wrong at an inopportune moment; but if the garment be clean,
you will be successful in adding to your fortune.

For a young woman to dream of mending, foretells that she will be a systematic
help to her husband.

_Mercury_.

To dream of mercury, is significant of unhappy changes through the constant
oppression of enemies.  For a woman to be suffering from mercurial poison,
foretells she will be deserted by and separated from her family.

_Merry_.

To dream being merry, or in merry company, denotes that pleasant events
will engage you for a time, and affairs will assume profitable shapes.

_Meshes_.

To dream of being entangled in the meshes of a net, or other
like constructions, denotes that enemies will oppress you in time
of seeming prosperity.  To a young woman, this dream foretells that her
environments will bring her into evil and consequent abandonment.
If she succeeds in disengaging herself from the meshes, she will
narrowly escape slander.

_Message_.

To dream of receiving a message, denotes that changes will take
place in your affairs.

To dream of sending a message, denotes that you will be placed
in unpleasant situations.

_Metamorphose_.

To dream of seeing anything metamorphose, denotes that sudden
changes will take place in your life, for good or bad,
as the metamorphose was pleasant or frightful.

_Mice_.

To dream of mice, foretells domestic troubles and the insincerity of friends.
Business affairs will assume a discouraging tone.

To kill mice, denotes that you will conquer your enemies.

To let them escape you, is significant of doubtful struggles.

For a young woman to dream of mice, warns her of secret enemies,
and that deception is being practised upon her.  If she
should see a mouse in her clothing, it is a sign of scandal
in which she will figure.

_Microscope_.

To dream of a microscope, denotes you will experience failure
or small returns in your enterprises.

_Midwife_.

To see a midwife in your dreams, signifies unfortunate sickness
with a narrow escape from death.

For a young woman to dream of such a person, foretells that distress
and calumny will attend her.

_Mile-post_.

To dream you see or pass a mile-post, foretells that you
will be assailed by doubtful fears in business or love.
To see one down, portends accidents are threatening to give
disorder to your affairs.

_Milk_.[125]

To dream of drinking milk, denotes abundant harvest to the farmer and
pleasure in the home; for a traveler, it foretells a fortunate voyage.
This is a very propitious dream for women.

To see milk in large quantities, signifies riches and health.

To dream of dealing in milk commercially, denotes great increase in fortune.

To give milk away, shows that you will be too benevolent for the good
of your own fortune.

To spill milk, denotes that you will experience a slight loss
and suffer temporary unhappiness at the hands of friends.

To dream of impure milk, denotes that you will be tormented
with petty troubles.

To dream of sour milk, denotes that you will be disturbed
over the distress of friends.

To dream of trying unsuccessfully to drink milk, signifies that you
will be in danger of losing something of value or the friendship
of a highly esteemed person.

To dream of hot milk, foretells a struggle, but the final winning
of riches and desires.

To dream of bathing in milk, denotes pleasures and companionships
of congenial friends.


[125] See Buttermilk.

_Milking_.

To dream of milking, and it flows in great streams from the udder,
while the cow is restless and threatening, signifies you will see
great opportunities withheld from you, but which will result in final
favor for you.

_Mill_.[126]

To dream of a mill, indicates thrift and fortunate undertakings.

To see a dilapidated mill, denotes sickness and ill fortune.

[126] See Cotton Mill, etc.

_Mill-dam_.

To dream that you see clear water pouring over a mill-dam, foretells
pleasant enterprises, either of a business or social nature.
If the water is muddy or impure, you will meet with losses,
and troubles will arise where pleasure was anticipated.

If the dam is dry, your business will assume shrunken proportions.

_Millet_.

To see a miller in your dreams, signifies your surroundings will grow
more hopeful.  For a woman to dream of a miller failing in an attempt
to start his mill, foretells she will be disappointed in her lover's wealth,
as she will think him in comfortable circumstances.

_Mine_.[127]

To dream of being in a mine, denotes failure in affairs.

To own a mine, denotes future wealth.


[127] See Coal Mine.

_Mineral_.

To dream of minerals, denotes your present unpromising outlook will grow
directly brighter.  To walk over mineral land, signifies distress,
from which you will escape and be bettered in your surroundings.

_Mineral Water_.

To dream of drinking mineral water, foretells fortune will favor
your efforts, and you will enjoy your opportunities to satisfy
your cravings for certain pleasures.

_Mining_.

To see mining in your dreams, denotes that an enemy is seeking
your ruin by bringing up past immoralities in your life.
You will be likely to make unpleasant journeys, if you stand
near the mine.

If you dream of hunting for mines, you will engage in worthless pursuits.

_Minister_.[128]

To dream of seeing a minister, denotes unfortunate changes
and unpleasant journeys.

To hear a minister exhort, foretells that some designing person
will influence you to evil.

To dream that you are a minister, denotes that you will
usurp another's rights.


[128] See Preacher and Priest.

_Minuet_.

To dream of seeing the minuet danced, signifies a pleasant existence
with congenial companions.

To dance it yourself, good fortune and domestic joys are foretold.

_Minx_.

To dream of a minx, denotes you will have sly enemies to overcome.

If you kill one, you will win your desires.  For a young woman to dream
that she is partial to minx furs, she will find protection and love
in some person who will be inordinately jealous.

_Mire_.

To dream of going through mire, indicates that your dearest wishes
and plans will receive a temporary check by the intervention of unusual
changes in your surroundings.

_Mirror_.[129]

To dream of seeing yourself in a mirror, denotes that you will meet
many discouraging issues, and sickness will cause you distress
and loss in fortune.

To see a broken mirror, foretells the sudden or violent death
of some one related to you.

To see others in a mirror, denotes that others will act unfairly
towards you to promote their own interests.

To see animals in a mirror, denotes disappointment and loss in fortune.

For a young woman to break a mirror, foretells unfortunate
friendships and an unhappy marriage.  To see her lover in a mirror
looking pale and careworn, denotes death or a broken engagement.
If he seems happy, a slight estrangement will arise, but it
will be of short duration.


[129] See Glass.

_Miser_.

To dream of a miser, foretells you will be unfortunate in finding true
happiness owing to selfishness, and love will disappoint you sorely.

For a woman to dream that she is befriended by a miser,
foretells she will gain love and wealth by her intelligence
and tactful conduct.

To dream that you are miserly, denotes that you will be obnoxious
to others by your conceited bearing

To dream that any of your friends are misers, foretells that you
will be distressed by the importunities of others.

_Mist_.

To dream that you are enveloped in a mist, denotes uncertain
fortunes and domestic unhappiness.  If the mist clears away,
your troubles will be of short duration.

To see others in a mist, you will profit by the misfortune of others.

_Mistletoe_.

To dream of mistletoe, foretells happiness and great rejoicing.

To the young, it omens many pleasant pastimes

If seen with unpromising signs, disappointment will displace
pleasure or fortune.

_Mocking-bird_.

To see or hear a mocking-bird, signifies you will be invited to go
on a pleasant visit to friends, and your affairs will move along
smoothly and prosperously.  For a woman to see a wounded or dead one,
her disagreement with a friend or lover is signified.

_Models_.

To dream of a model, foretells your social affairs will
deplete your purse, and quarrels and regrets will follow.
For a young woman to dream that she is a model or seeking to be one,
foretells she will be entangled in a love affair which will give
her trouble through the selfishness of a friend.

_Molasses_.

To dream of molasses, is a sign that some one is going to
extend you pleasant hospitality, and, through its acceptance,
you will meet agreeable and fortunate surprises.  To eat it,
foretells that you will be discouraged and disappointed in love.
To have it smeared on your clothing, denotes you will have
disagreeable offers of marriage, and probably losses in business.

_Moles_.

To dream of moles, indicates secret enemies.

To dream of catching a mole, you will overcome any opposition
and rise to prominence.

To see moles, or such blemishes, on the person, indicates
illness and quarrels.

_Money_.

To dream of finding money, denotes small worries, but much happiness.
Changes will follow.

To pay out money, denotes misfortune.

To receive gold, great prosperity and unalloyed pleasures.

To lose money, you will experience unhappy hours in the home
and affairs will appear gloomy.

To count your money and find a deficit, you will be worried
in making payments.

To dream that you steal money, denotes that you are in danger
and should guard your actions.

To save money, augurs wealth and comfort.

To dream that you swallow money, portends that you are likely
to become mercenary.

To look upon a quantity of money, denotes that prosperity and happiness
are within your reach.

To dream you find a roll of currency, and a young woman claims it,
foretells you will lose in some enterprise by the interference
of some female friend.  The dreamer will find that he is
spending his money unwisely and is living beyond his means.
It is a dream of caution.

Beware lest the innocent fancies of your brain make a place
for your money before payday.

_Monk_.

To dream of seeing a monk, foretells dissensions in the family
and unpleasant journeyings.  To a young woman, this dream signifies
that gossip and deceit will be used against her.

To dream that you are a monk, denotes personal loss and illness.

_Monkey_.

To dream of a monkey, denotes that deceitful people will flatter
you to advance their own interests.

To see a dead monkey, signifies that your worst enemies will soon be removed.

If a young woman dreams of a monkey, she should insist on an early marriage,
as her lover will suspect unfaithfulness.

For a woman to dream of feeding a monkey, denotes that she will be betrayed
by a flatterer.

_Monster_.

To dream of being pursued by a monster, denotes that sorrow and misfortune
hold prominent places in your immediate future.

To slay a monster, denotes that you will successfully cope with enemies
and rise to eminent positions.

_Moon_.

To dream of seeing the moon with the aspect of the heavens remaining normal,
prognosticates success in love and business affairs.

A weird and uncanny moon, denotes unpropitious lovemaking,
domestic infelicities and disappointing enterprises of
a business character.

The moon in eclipse, denotes that contagion will ravage your community.

To see the new moon, denotes an increase in wealth and congenial
partners in marriage.

For a young woman to dream that she appeals to the moon to know
her fate, denotes that she will soon be rewarded with marriage
to the one of her choice.  If she sees two moons, she will lose
her lover by being mercenary.  If she sees the moon grow dim,
she will let the supreme happiness of her life slip for want
of womanly tact.

To see a blood red moon, indicates war and strife, and she will see
her lover march away in defence of his country.

_Morgue_.

To dream that you visit a morgue searching for some one, denotes that you
will be shocked by news of the death of a relative or friend.

To see many corpses there, much sorrow and trouble will come
under your notice.

_Morning_.

To see the morning dawn clear in your dreams, prognosticates a near
approach of fortune and pleasure.

A cloudy morning, portends weighty affairs will overwhelm you.

_Morocco_.

To see morocco in your dreams, foretells that you will receive substantial
aid from unexpected sources.  Your love will be rewarded by faithfulness.

_Mortgage_.

To dream that you give a mortgage on your property, denotes that you
are threatened with financial upheavals, which will throw you
into embarrassing positions.

To take, or hold one, against others, is ominous of adequate wealth
to liquidate your obligations.

To find yourself reading or examining mortgages, denotes great possibilities
before you of love or gain.

To lose a mortgage, if it cannot be found again, implies loss and worry.

_Morose_.

If you find yourself morose in dreams, you will awake to find the world,
as far as you are concerned, going fearfully wrong.

To see others morose, portends unpleasant occupations
and unpleasant companions.

_Mortification_.

To dream that you feel mortified over any deed committed by yourself,
is a sign that you will be placed in an unenviable position
before those to whom you most wish to appear honorable and just.
Financial conditions will fall low.

To see mortified flesh, denotes disastrous enterprises and
disappointment in love.

_Moses_.

To dream that you see Moses, means personal gain and a connubial alliance
which will be a source of sweet congratulation to yourself.

_Mosquito_.

To see mosquitoes in your dreams, you will strive in vain
to remain impregnable to the sly attacks of secret enemies.
Your patience and fortune will both suffer from these designing persons.

If you kill mosquitoes, you will eventually overcome obstacles
and enjoy fortune and domestic bliss.

_Moss_.

To dream of moss, denotes that you will fill dependent positions,
unless the moss grows in rich soil, when you will be favored with honors.

_Moth_.

To see a moth in a dream, small worries will lash you
into hurried contracts, which will prove unsatisfactory.
Quarrels of a domestic nature are prognosticated.

_Mother_.

To see your mother in dreams as she appears in the home,
signifies pleasing results from any enterprise.

To hold her in conversation, you will soon have good news from interests
you are anxious over.

For a woman to dream of mother, signifies pleasant duties
and connubial bliss.

To see one's mother emaciated or dead, foretells sadness caused
by death or dishonor.

To hear your mother call you, denotes that you are derelict in your duties,
and that you are pursuing the wrong course in business.

To hear her cry as if in pain, omens her illness, or some affliction
is menacing you.

_Mother-in-law_.

To dream of your mother-in-law, denotes there will be pleasant
reconciliations for you after some serious disagreement.
For a woman to dispute with her mother-in-law, she will find
that quarrelsome and unfeeling people will give her annoyance.

_Mountain_.

For a young woman to dream of crossing a mountain in company
with her cousin and dead brother, who was smiling, denotes she
will have a distinctive change in her life for the better, but there
are warnings against allurements and deceitfulness of friends.
If she becomes exhausted and refuses to go further, she will be
slightly disappointed in not gaining quite so exalted a position
as was hoped for by her.

If you ascend a mountain in your dreams, and the way is pleasant
and verdant, you will rise swiftly to wealth and prominence.
If the mountain is rugged, and you fail to reach the top,
you may expect reverses in your life, and should strive to overcome
all weakness in your nature.  To awaken when you are at a dangerous
point in ascending, denotes that you will find affairs taking
a flattering turn when they appear gloomy.

_Mourning_.

To dream that you wear mourning, omens ill luck and unhappiness.

If others wear it, there will be disturbing influences among
your friends causing you unexpected dissatisfaction and loss.
To lovers, this dream foretells misunderstanding and probable separation.

_Mouse_.[130]

For a woman to dream of a mouse, denotes that she will have an enemy
who will annoy her by artfulness and treachery.

_Mouse-trap_.

To see a mouse-trap in dreams, signifies your need to be careful of character,
as wary persons have designs upon you.

To see it full of mice, you will likely fall into the hands of enemies.

To set a trap, you will artfully devise means to overcome your opponents.


[130] See Mice.

_Mud_.

To dream that you walk in mud, denotes that you will have cause to lose
confidence in friendships, and there will be losses and disturbances
in family circles.

To see others walking in mud, ugly rumors will reach you of some friend
or employee.  To the farmer, this dream is significant of short crops
and unsatisfactory gains from stock.

To see mud on your clothing, your reputation is being assailed.
To scrape it off, signifies that you will escape the calumny of enemies.

_Muff_.

To dream of wearing a muff, denotes that you will be well provided
for against the vicissitudes of fortune.

For a lover to see his sweetheart wearing a muff, denotes that a worthier
man will usurp his place in her affections.

_Mulatto_.[131]

If a mulatto appears to you in a dream, beware of making new friendships
or falling into associations with strange women, as you are threatened
with loss of money and of high moral standing.


[131] See Negro.

_Mulberries_.

To see mulberries in your dreams, denotes that sickness will prevent
you from obtaining your desires, and you will be called upon often
to relieve suffering.

To eat them, signifies bitter disappointments.

_Mule_.

If you dream that your are riding on a mule, it denotes that you
are engaging in pursuits which will cause you the greatest anxiety,
but if you reach your destination without interruption, you will
be recompensed with substantial results.

For a young woman to dream of a white mule, shows she will marry a wealthy
foreigner, or one who, while wealthy, will not be congenial in tastes.
If she dreams of mules running loose, she will have beaux and admirers,
but no offers of marriage.

To be kicked by a mule, foretells disappointment in love and marriage.

To see one dead, portends broken engagements and social decline.

_Murder_.[132]

To see murder committed in your dreams, foretells much sorrow
arising from the misdeeds of others.  Affair will assume dulness.
Violent deaths will come under your notice.

If you commit murder, it signifies that you are engaging in some
dishonorable adventure, which will leave a stigma upon your name.

To dream that you are murdered, foretells that enemies are secretly
working to overthrow you.


[132] See Killing and kindred words.

_Muscle_.

To dream of seeing your muscle well developed, you will have strange
encounters with enemies, but you will succeed in surmounting their evil works,
and gain fortune.

If they are shrunken, your inability to succeed in your affairs is portended.
For a woman, this dream is prophetic of toil and hardships.

_Museum_.

To dream of a museum, denotes you will pass through many and varied
scenes in striving for what appears your rightful position.
You will acquire useful knowledge, which will stand you in better
light than if you had pursued the usual course to learning.
If the museum is distasteful, you will have many causes for vexation.

_Music_.

To dream of hearing harmonious music, omens pleasure and prosperity.

Discordant music foretells troubles with unruly children,
and unhappiness in the household.

_Musical Instruments_.

To see musical instruments, denotes anticipated pleasures.

If they are broken, the pleasure will be marred by uncongenial companionship.
For a young woman, this dream foretells for her the power to make her life
what she will.

_Mushroom_.

To see mushrooms in your dreams, denotes unhealthy desires,
and unwise haste in amassing wealth, as it may vanish in law
suits and vain pleasures.

To eat them, signifies humiliation and disgraceful love.

For a young woman to dream of them, foretells her defiance of propriety
in her pursuit of foolish pleasures.

_Musk_.

To dream of musk, foretells unexpected occasions of joy,
and lovers will agree and cease to be unfaithful.

_Mussels_.

To dream of water mussels, denotes small fortune, but contentment
and domestic enjoyment.

_Mustache_.

To dream that you have a mustache, denotes that your egotism and
effrontery will cause you a poor inheritance in worldy{sic} goods,
and you will betray women to their sorrow.

If a woman dreams of admiring a mustache, her virtue is in danger,
and she should be mindful of her conduct.

If a man dreams that he has his mustache shaved, he will try to turn
from evil companions and pleasures, and seek to reinstate himself
in former positions of honor.

_Mustard_.

To see mustard growing, and green, foretells success and joy to the farmer,
and to the seafaring it prognosticates wealth.

To eat mustard seed and feel the burning in your mouth,
denotes that you will repent bitterly some hasty action,
which has caused you to suffer.

To dream of eating green mustard cooked, indicates the lavish
waste of fortune, and mental strain.

For a young woman to eat newly grown mustard, foretells that she
will sacrifice wealth for personal desires.

_Mute_.

To converse with a mute in your dreams, foretells that unusual
crosses in your life will fit you for higher positions,
which will be tendered you.

To dream that you are a mute, portends calamities and unjust persecution.

_Myrrh_.

To see myrrh in a dream, signifies your investments will give satisfaction.
For a young woman to dream of myrrh, brings a pleasing surprise to her
in the way of a new and wealthy acquaintance.

_Myrtle_.

To see myrtle in foliage and bloom in your dream, denotes that your desires
will be gratified, and pleasures will possess you.

For a young woman to dream of wearing a sprig of myrtle, foretells to her
an early marriage with a well-to do and intelligent man.

To see it withered, denotes that she will miss happiness
through careless conduct.

_Mystery_.

To find yourself bewildered by some mysterious event, denotes that
strangers will harass you with their troubles and claim your aid.
It warns you also of neglected duties, for which you feel much aversion.
Business will wind you into unpleasant complications.

To find yourself studying the mysteries of creation, denotes that a change
will take place in your life, throwing you into a higher atmosphere
of research and learning, and thus advancing you nearer the attainment
of true pleasure and fortune.



N.

``_And he slept and dreamed the second time; and, behold,
seven ears of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and good_.''--
Gen. xli, 5.

_Nails_.

To see nails in your dreams, indicates much toil and small recompense.

To deal in nails, shows that you will engage in honorable work,
even if it be lowly.

To see rusty or broken nails, indicates sickness and failure in business.

_Naked_.

To dream that you are naked, foretells scandal and unwise engagements.

To see others naked, foretells that you will be tempted by designing
persons to leave the path of duty.  Sickness will be no small factor
against your success.

To dream that you suddenly discover your nudity, and are trying to conceal it,
denotes that you have sought illicit pleasure contrary to your noblest
instincts and are desirous of abandoning those desires.

For a young woman to dream that she admires her nudity,
foretells that she will win, but not hold honest men's regard.
She will win fortune by her charms.  If she thinks herself
ill-formed, her reputation will be sullied by scandal.
If she dreams of swimming in clear water naked, she will enjoy
illicit loves, but nature will revenge herself by sickness,
or loss of charms.  If she sees naked men swimming in clear water,
she will have many admirers.  If the water is muddy, a jealous
admirer will cause ill-natured gossip about her.

_Napkin_.

To dream of a napkin, foretells convivial entertainments in which you
will figure prominently.  For a woman to dream of soiled napkins,
foretells that humiliating affairs will thrust themselves upon her.

_Navy_.[133]

To dream of the navy, denotes victorious struggles with unsightly
obstacles, and the promise of voyages and tours of recreation.
If in your dream you seem frightened or disconcerted, you will
have strange obstacles to overcome before you reach fortune.
A dilapidated navy is an indication of unfortunate friendships
in business or love.


[133] See Gunboat.

_Nearsighted_.

To dream that you are nearsighted, signifies embarrassing
failure and unexpected visits from unwelcome persons.
For a young woman, this dream foretells unexpected rivalry.

To dream that your sweetheart is nearsighted, denotes that she
will disappoint you.

_Neck_.

To dream that you see your own neck, foretells that vexatious
family relations will interfere with your business.

To admire the neck of another, signifies your worldly mindedness will cause
broken domestic ties.

For a woman to dream that her neck is thick, foretells that she will become
querulous and something of a shrew if she fails to control her temper.

_Necklace_.

For a woman to dream of receiving a necklace, omens for her a loving
husband and a beautiful home.

To lose a necklace, she will early feel the heavy hand of bereavement.

_Necromancer_.[134]

To dream of a necromancer and his arts, denotes that you are threatened
with strange acquaintances who will influence you for evil.


[134] See Hypnotist.

_Need_.

To dream that you are in need, denotes that you will speculate unwisely
and distressing news of absent friends will oppress you.

To see others in need, foretells that unfortunate affairs will affect
yourself with others.

_Needle_.

To use a needle in your dream, is a warning of approaching affliction,
in which you will suffer keenly the loss of sympathy,
which is rightfully yours.

To dream of threading a needle, denotes that you will be burdened
with the care of others than your own household.

To look for a needle, foretells useless worries.

To find a needle, foretells that you will have friends who
will appreciate you.

To break one, signifies loneliness and poverty.

_Negro_.[135]

To dream of seeing a negro standing on your green lawn, is a sign
that while your immediate future seems filled with prosperity
and sweetest joys, there will creep into it unavoidable discord,
which will veil all brightness in gloom for a season.

To dream of seeing a burly negro, denotes formidable rivals
in affection and business.

To see a mulatto, constant worries and friction with hirelings is foretold.

To dream of a difficulty with a negro, signifies your inability to overcome
disagreeable surroundings.  It also denotes disappointments and ill fortune.

For a young woman to dream of a negro, she will be constrained
to work for her own support, or be disappointed in her lover.

To dream of negro children, denotes many little anxieties and crosses.

For a young woman to dream of being held by a negro, portends for her many
disagreeable duties.  She is likely to meet with and give displeasure.
She will quarrel with her dearest friends.

Sickness sometimes follows dreams of old negroes.

To see one nude, abject despair, and failure to cope with
treachery may follow.  Enemies will work you signal harm,
and bad news from the absent may be expected.

To meet with a trusty negro in a place where he ought not to be,
foretells you will be deceived by some person in whom you placed
great confidence.  You are likely to be much exasperated over
the conduct of a servant or some person under your orders.
Delays and vexations may follow.

To think that you are preaching to negroes is a warning to protect
your interest, as false friends are dealing surreptitiously with you.
To hear a negro preaching denotes you will be greatly worried over
material matters and servants are giving cause for uneasiness.


[135] See Mulatto.

_Neighbor_.

To see your neighbors in your dreams, denotes many profitable hours
will be lost in useless strife and gossip.  If they appear sad,
or angry, it foretells dissensions and quarrels.

_Nephew_.

To dream of your nephew, denotes you are soon to come into
a pleasing competency, if he is handsome and well looking;
otherwise, there will be disappointment and discomfort for you.

_Nest_.[136]

To dream of seeing birds' nests, denotes that you will be
interested in an enterprise which will be prosperous.
For a young woman, this dream foretells change of abode.

To see an empty nest, indicates sorrow through the absence of a friend.

Hens' nests, foretells that you will be interested in domesticities,
and children will be cheerful and obedient.

To dream of a nest filled with broken or bad eggs,
portends disappointments and failure.


[136] See Birds' Nest.

_Nets_.

To dream of ensnaring anything with a net, denotes that you will be
unscrupulous in your dealings and deportment with others.

To dream of an old or torn net, denotes that your property has mortgages,
or attachments, which will cause you trouble.

_Nettles_.

If in your dreams you walk among nettles without being stung,
you will be prosperous.

To be stung by them, you will be discontented with yourself
and make others unhappy.

For a young woman to dream of passing through nettles,
foretells that she will be offered marriage by different men,
and her decision will fill her with anxious foreboding.

To dream of nettles, is portentous of stringent circumstances
and disobedience from children or servants.

_News_.

To hear good news in a dream, denotes that you will be fortunate
in affairs, and have harmonious companions; but if the news be bad,
contrary conditions will exist.

_Newspaper_.

To dream of newspapers, denotes that frauds will be detected in your dealings,
and your reputation will likewise be affected.

To print a newspaper, you will have opportunities of making foreign
journeys and friends.

Trying, but failing to read a newspaper, denotes that you will fail
in some uncertain enterprise.

_Newspaper Reporter_.

If in your dreams you unwillingly see them, you will be annoyed
with small talk, and perhaps quarrels of a low character.

If you are a newspaper reporter in your dreams, there will be a varied course
of travel offered you, though you may experience unpleasant situations,
yet there will be some honor and gain attached.

_New Year_.

To dream of the new year, signifies prosperity and connubial anticipations.
If you contemplate the new year in weariness, engagement will be
entered into inauspiciously.

_Niece_.

For a woman to dream of her niece, foretells she will have unexpected
trials and much useless worry in the near future.

_Night_.[137]

If you are surrounded by night in your dreams, you may expect unusual
oppression and hardships in business.  If the night seems to be vanishing,
conditions which hitherto seemed unfavorable will now grow bright,
and affairs will assume prosperous phases.


[137] See Darkness.

_Nightmare_.

To dream of being attacked with this hideous sensation,
denotes wrangling and failure in business.  For a young woman,
this is a dream prophetic of disappointment and unmerited slights.
It may also warn the dreamer to be careful of her health, and food.

_Nightingale_.

To dream that you are listening to the harmonious notes of the nightingale,
foretells a pleasing existence, and prosperous and healthy surroundings.
This is a most favorable dream to lovers, and parents.

To see nightingales silent, foretells slight misunderstandings among friends.

_Ninepins_.

To dream that you play ninepins, denotes that you
are foolishly wasting your energy and opportunities.
You should be careful in the selection of companions.
All phases of this dream are bad.

_Nobility_.

To dream of associating with the nobility, denotes that your aspirations
are not of the right nature, as you prefer show and pleasures to the higher
development of the mind.

For a young woman to dream of the nobility, foretells that she
will choose a lover for his outward appearance, instead of wisely
accepting the man of merit for her protector.

_Noise_.

If you hear a strange noise in your dream, unfavorable news is presaged.
If the noise awakes you, there will be a sudden change in your affairs.

_Noodles_.

To dream of noodles, denotes an abnormal appetite and desires.
There is little good in this dream.

_Nose_.

To see your own nose, indicates force of character, and consciousness of your
ability to accomplish whatever enterprise you may choose to undertake.

If your nose looks smaller than natural, there will be failure
in your affairs.  Hair growing on your nose, indicates extraordinary
undertakings, and that they will be carried through by sheer force
of character, or will.

A bleeding nose, is prophetic of disaster, whatever the calling
of the dreamer may be.

_Notary_.

To dream of a notary, is a prediction of unsatisfied desires,
and probable lawsuits.  For a woman to associate with a notary,
foretells she will rashly risk her reputation, in gratification
of foolish pleasure.

_November_.

To dream of November, augers a season of indifferent success
in all affairs.

_Numbness_.

To dream that you feel a numbness creeping over you, in your dreams,
is a sign of illness, and disquieting conditions

_Numbers_.[138]

To dream of numbers, denotes that unsettled conditions in business
will cause you uneasiness and dissatisfaction.


[138] See Figures.

_Nuns_.

For a religiously inclined man to dream of nuns, foretells that
material joys will interfere with his spirituality.
He should be wise in the control of self.

For a woman to dream of nuns, foretells her widowhood, or her
separation from her lover.  If she dreams that she is a nun,
it portends her discontentment with present environments.

To see a dead nun, signifies despair over the unfaithfulness of loved ones,
and impoverished fortune.

For one to dream that she discards the robes of her order,
foretells that longing for worldly pleasures will unfit her
for her chosen duties.

_Nuptial_.[139]

For a woman to dream of her nuptials, she will soon enter upon
new engagements, which will afford her distinction, pleasure, and harmony.


[139] See Marriage.

_Nurse_.

To dream that a nurse is retained in your home, foretells distressing illness,
or unlucky visiting among friends.

To see a nurse leaving your house, omens good health in the family.

For a young woman to dream that she is a nurse, denotes that she will gain
the esteem of people, through her self-sacrifice. If she parts from a patient,
she will yield to the persuasion of deceit.

_Nursing_.

For a woman to dream of nursing her baby, denotes pleasant employment.

For a young woman to dream of nursing a baby, foretells that she
will occupy positions of honor and trust.

For a man to dream of seeing his wife nurse their baby,
denotes harmony in his pursuits.

_Nuts_.

To dream of gathering nuts, augurs successful enterprises,
and much favor in love.

To eat them, prosperity will aid you in grasping any desired pleasure.

For a woman to dream of nuts, foretells that her fortune will
be on blissful heights.

_Nutmegs_.

To dream of nutmegs, is a sign of prosperity, and pleasant journeyings.

_Nymph_.

To see nymphs bathing in clear water, denotes that passionate desires will
find an ecstatic realization.  Convivial entertainments will enchant you.

To see them out of their sphere, denotes disappointment with the world.

For a young woman to see them bathing, denotes that she will have great
favor and pleasure, but they will not rest strictly within the moral code.
To dream that she impersonates a nymph, is a sign that she is using her
attractions for selfish purposes, and thus the undoing of men.



O.

``_And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit
upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy,
your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions_.''--
Joel ii., 28

_Oak_.

To dream of seeing a forest of oaks, signifies great prosperity
in all conditions of life.

To see an oak full of acorns, denotes increase and promotion.

If blasted oak, it denotes sudden and shocking surprises.

For sweethearts to dream of oaks, denotes that they will soon
begin life together under favorable circumstances.

_Oar_.

To dream of handling oars, portends disappointments for you, inasmuch as you
will sacrifice your own pleasure for the comfort of others.

To lose an oar, denotes vain efforts to carry out designs satisfactorily.

A broken oar represents interruption in some anticipated pleasure.

_Oath_.

Whenever you take an oath in your dreams, prepare for dissension
and altercations on waking.

_Oatmeal_.

To dream of eating oatmeal, signifies the enjoyment of
worthily earned fortune.

For a young woman to dream of preparing it for the table,
denotes that she will soon preside over the destiny of others.

_Oats_.

To dream that oats hold the vision, portends a variety of good things.
The farmer will especially advance in fortune and domestic harmony.

To see decayed oats, foretells that sorrow will displace bright hopes.

_Obedience_.

To dream that you render obedience to another, foretells for you
a common place, a pleasant but uneventful period of life.

If others are obedient to you, it shows that you will command
fortune and high esteem.

_Obelisk_.

An obelisk looming up stately and cold in your dreams is the forerunner
of melancholy tidings.

For lovers to stand at the base of an obelisk, denotes fatal disagreements.

_Obituary_.

To dream of writing an obituary, denotes that unpleasant and discordant
duties will devolve upon you.

If you read one, news of a distracting nature will soon reach you.

_Obligation_.

To dream of obligating yourself in any incident, denotes that you
will be fretted and worried by the thoughtless complaints of others.

If others obligate themselves to you, it portends that you will win
the regard of acquaintances and friends.

_Observatory_.

To dream of viewing the heavens and beautiful landscapes from an observatory,
denotes your swift elevation to prominent positions and places of trust.
For a young woman this dream signals the realization of the highest
earthly joys.  If the heavens are clouded, your highest aims
will miss materialization.

_Occultist_.

To dream that you listen to the teachings of an occultist, denotes that you
will strive to elevate others to a higher plane of justice and forbearance.
If you accept his views, you will find honest delight by keeping your mind
and person above material frivolities and pleasures.

_Ocean_.

To dream of the ocean when it is calm is propitious.
The sailor will have a pleasant and profitable voyage.
The business man will enjoy a season of remuneration,
and the young man will revel in his sweetheart's charms.

To be far out on the ocean, and hear the waves lash the ship,
forebodes disaster in business life, and quarrels and stormy
periods in the household.

To be on shore and see the waves of the ocean foaming against each other,
foretells your narrow escape from injury and the designs of enemies.

To dream of seeing the ocean so shallow as to allow wading,
or a view of the bottom, signifies prosperity and pleasure
with a commingling of sorrow and hardships.

To sail on the ocean when it is calm, is always propitious.

_October_.

To imagine you are in October is ominous of gratifying success
in your undertakings.  You will also make new acquaintances
which will ripen into lasting friendships.

_Oculist_.

To dream of consulting an oculist, denotes that you will be dissatisfied
with your progress in life, and will use artificial means of advancement.

_Odd-Fellow_.

To dream of this order, signifies that you will have sincere friends,
and misfortune will touch you but lightly.

To join this order, foretells that you will win distinction
and conjugal bliss.

_Odor_.

To dream of inhaling sweet odors, is a sign of a beautiful woman
ministering to your daily life, and successful financiering.

To smell disgusting odors, foretells unpleasant disagreements
and unreliable servants.

_Offense_.

To dream of being offended, denotes that errors will be detected
in your conduct, which will cause you inward rage while attempting
to justify yourself.

To give offense, predicts for you many struggles before reaching your aims.

For a young woman to give, or take offense, signifies that she will regret
hasty conclusions, and disobedience to parents or guardian.

_Offering_.

To bring or make an offering, foretells that you will be cringing
and hypocritical unless you cultivate higher views of duty.

_Office_.

For a person to dream that he holds office, denotes that his
aspirations will sometimes make him undertake dangerous paths,
but his boldness will be rewarded with success.  If he fails
by any means to secure a desired office he will suffer keen
disappointment in his affairs.

To dream that you are turned out of office, signifies loss of valuables.

_Offspring_.

To dream of your own offspring, denotes cheerfulness and the merry voices
of neighbors and children.

To see the offspring of domestic animals, denotes increase in prosperity.

_Oil_.

To dream of anointing with oil, foretells events in which you
will be the particular moving power.

Quantities of oil, prognosticates excesses in pleasurable enterprises.

For a man to dream that he deals in oil, denotes unsuccessful love making,
as he will expect unusual concessions.

For a woman to dream that she is anointed with oil, shows that she
will be open to indiscreet advances.

_Oilcloth_.

To dream of oilcloth is a warning that you will meet coldness and treachery.

To deal in it, denotes uncertain speculations.

_Ointment_.

To dream of ointment, denotes that you will form friendships
which will prove beneficial and pleasing to you.

For a young woman to dream that she makes ointment, denotes that she
will be able to command her own affairs whether they be of a private
or public character.

_Old Man, or Woman_.[140]

To dream of seeing an old man, or woman, denotes that unhappy cares
will oppress you, if they appear otherwise than serene.


[140] See Faces, Men, and Women.

_Olives_.

Gathering olives with a merry band of friends, foretells favorable
results in business, and delightful surprises.

If you take them from bottles, it foretells conviviality

To break a bottle of olives, indicates disappointments on the eve of pleasure.

To eat them, signifies contentment and faithful friends.

_Omelet_.

To see omelet being served in your dream, warns you of flattery and deceit,
which is about to be used against you.

To eat it, shows that you will be imposed upon by some one seemingly worthy
of your confidence.

_Omnibus_.[141]

To dream that you are being drawn through the streets in an omnibus,
foretells misunderstandings with friends, and unwise promises will be
made by you.


[141] See Carriage.

_One-Eyed_.

To see one-eyed creatures in your dreams, is portentous of an over-whelming
intimation of secret intriguing against your fortune and happiness.

_Onions_.

Seeing quantities of onions in your dreams, represents the amount
of spite and envy that you will meet, by being successful.

If you eat them, you will overcome all opposition.

If you see them growing, there will be just enough of rivalry in your affairs,
to make things interesting.

Cooked onions, denote placidity and small gains in business.

To dream that you are cutting onions and feel the escaping juice in your eyes,
denotes that you will be defeated by your rivals.

_Opera_.

To dream of attending an opera, denotes that you will be entertained by
congenial friends, and find that your immediate affairs will be favorable.

_Opium_.

To dream of opium, signifies strangers will obstruct your chances
of improving your fortune, by sly and seductive means.

_Opulence_.[142]

For a young woman to dream that she lives in fairy like opulence,
denotes that she will be deceived, and will live for a time in luxurious
ease and splendor, to find later that she is mated with shame and poverty.
When young women dream that they are enjoying solid and real wealth
and comforts, they will always wake to find some real pleasure,
but when abnormal or fairy-like dreams of luxury and joy seem to
encompass them, their waking moments will be filled with disappointments;
as the dreams are warnings, superinduced by their practicality being
supplanted by their excitable imagination and lazy desires, which should
be overcome with energy, and the replacing of practicality on her base.
No young woman should fill her mind with idle day dreams,
but energetically strive to carry forward noble ideals and thoughts,
and promising and helpful dreams will come to her while she restores
physical energies in sleep.


[142] See Wealth.

_Oranges_.

Seeing a number of orange trees in a healthy condition, bearing ripe fruit,
is a sign of health and prosperous surroundings.

To eat oranges is signally bad.  Sickness of friends or relatives
will be a source of worry to you.  Dissatisfaction will pervade
the atmosphere in business circles.  If they are fine and
well-flavored, there will be a slight abatement of ill luck.
A young woman is likely to lose her lover, if she dreams of
eating oranges.  If she dreams of seeing a fine one pitched up high,
she will be discreet in choosing a husband from many lovers.

To slip on an orange peel, foretells the death of a relative.

To buy oranges at your wife's solicitation, and she eats them, denotes that
unpleasant complications will resolve themselves into profit.

_Orang-utang_.

To dream of an orang-utang, denotes that some person is
falsely using your influence to further selfish schemes.
For a young woman, it portends an unfaithful lover.

_Orator_.

Being under the spell of an orator's eloquence, denotes that
you will heed the voice of flattery to your own detriment,
as you will be persuaded into offering aid to unworthy people.

If a young woman falls in love with an orator, it is proof that in her loves
she will be affected by outward show.

_Orchard_.

Dreaming of passing through leaving and blossoming orchards
with your sweetheart, omens a delightful consummation of a
long courtship.  If the orchard is filled with ripening fruit,
it denotes recompense for faithful service to those under masters,
and full fruition of designs for the leaders of enterprises.
Happy homes, with loyal husbands and obedient children, for wives.

If you are in an orchard and see hogs eating the fallen fruit,
it is a sign that you will lose property in trying to claim
what are not really your own belongings.

To gather the ripe fruit, is a happy omen of plenty to all classes.

Orchards infested with blight, denotes a miserable existence,
amid joy and wealth.

To be caught in brambles, while passing through an orchard,
warns you of a jealous rival, or, if married, a private but large
row with your partner.

If you dream of seeing a barren orchard, opportunities to rise
to higher stations in life will be ignored.

If you see one robbed of its verdure by seeming winter, it denotes that you
have been careless of the future in the enjoyment of the present.

To see a storm-swept orchard, brings an unwelcome guest, or duties.

_Orchestra_.

Belonging to an orchestra and playing, foretells pleasant entertainments,
and your sweetheart will be faithful and cultivated.

To hear the music of an orchestra, denotes that the knowledge
of humanity will at all times prove you to be a much-liked person,
and favors will fall unstintedly upon you.

_Organ_.

To hear the pealing forth of an organ in grand anthems,
signifies lasting friendships and well-grounded fortune.

To see an organ in a church, denotes despairing separation of families,
and death, perhaps, for some of them.

If you dream of rendering harmonious music on an organ,
you will be fortunate in the way to worldly comfort, and much
social distinction will be given you.

To hear doleful singing and organ accompaniment, denotes you are nearing
a wearisome task, and probable loss of friends or position.

_Organist_.

To see an organist in your dreams, denotes a friend will cause you much
inconvenience from hasty action.  For a young woman to dream that she
is an organist, foretells she will be so exacting in her love that she
will be threatened with desertion.

_Ornament_.

If you wear ornaments in dreams, you will have a flattering honor
conferred upon you.

If you receive them, you will be fortunate in undertakings.

Giving them away, denotes recklessness and lavish extravagance.

Losing an ornament, brings the loss either of a lover, or a good situation.

_Orphan_.

Condoling with orphans in a dream, means that the unhappy cares
of others will touch your sympathies and cause you to sacrifice
much personal enjoyment.

If the orphans be related to you, new duties will come into your life,
causing estrangement from friends ant from some person held above
mere friendly liking.

_Ostrich_.

To dream of an ostrich, denotes that you will secretly amass wealth,
but at the same time maintain degrading intrigues with women.

To catch one, your resources will enable you to enjoy travel
and extensive knowledge.

_Otter_.

To see otters diving and sporting in limpid streams is certain
to bring the dreamer waking happiness and good fortune.
You will find ideal enjoyment in an early marriage, if you
are single; wives may expect unusual tenderness from their
spouses after this dream.

_Ottoman_.[143]

Dreams in which you find yourself luxuriously reposing upon an ottoman,
discussing the intricacies of love with your sweetheart, foretells that
envious rivals will seek to defame you in the eyes of your affianced,
and a hasty marriage will be advised.


[143] See Couch.

_Ouija_.

To dream of working on an ouija board, foretells the miscarriage of plans
and unlucky partnerships.

To fail to work, one is ominous of complications, caused by substituting
pleasure for business.

If it writes fluently, you may expect fortunate results from
some well-planned enterprise.

If a negro steals it, you will meet with trials and vexations past endurance.
To recover it, foretells that grievances will meet a favorable adjustment.

_Oven_.

For a woman to dream that her baking oven is red hot, denotes that she will
be loved by her own family and friends, for her sweet and unselfish nature.
If she is baking, temporary disappointments await her.  If the oven is broken,
she will undergo many vexations from children and servants.

_Overcoat_.

To dream of an overcoat, denotes you will suffer from contrariness,
exhibited by others.  To borrow one, foretells you will be unfortunate
through mistakes made by strangers.  If you see or are wearing a handsome
new overcoat, you will be exceedingly fortunate in realizing your wishes.

_Over-alls_.

For a woman to dream that she sees a man wearing over-alls,
she will be deceived as to the real character of her lover.
If a wife, she will be deceived in her husband's frequent absence,
and the real cause will create suspicions of his fidelity.

_Owl_.

To hear the solemn, unearthly sound of the muffled voice of the owl,
warns dreamers that death creeps closely in the wake of health and joy.
Precaution should be taken that life is not ruthlessly exposed to his
unyielding grasp.  Bad tidings of the absent will surely follow this dream.

To see a dead owl, denotes a narrow escape from desperate illness or death.

To see an owl, foretells that you will be secretly maligned
and be in danger from enemies.

_Ox_.[144]

To see a well-fed ox, signifies that you will become a leading person
in your community, and receive much adulation from women.

To see fat oxen in green pastures, signifies fortune,
and your rise to positions beyond your expectations.
If they are lean, your fortune will dwindle, and your friends
will fall away from you.

If you see oxen well-matched and yoked, it betokens a happy and
wealthy marriage, or that you are already joined to your true mate.

To see a dead ox, is a sign of bereavement.

If they are drinking from a clear pond, or stream, you will possess
some long-desired estate, perhaps it will be in the form of a lovely
and devoted woman.  If a woman she will win the embraces of her lover.


[144] See Cattle.

_Oysters_.

If you dream that you eat oysters, it denotes that you will lose
all sense of propriety and morality in your pursuit of low pleasures,
and the indulgence of an insatiate thirst for gaining.

To deal in oysters, denotes that you will not be over-modest in your mode
of winning a sweetheart, or a fortune.

To see them, denotes easy circumstances, and many children are promised you.

_Oyster Shells_.

To see oyster shells in your dreams, denotes that you will be frustrated
in your attempt to secure the fortune of another.



P.

``_And the King said unto them, I have dreamed a dream,
and my spirit was troubled to know the dream_.''--Dan.  ii., 3.

_Pacify_.

To endeavor to pacify suffering ones, denotes that you will be
loved for your sweetness of disposition.  To a young woman,
this dream is one of promise of a devoted husband or friends.

Pacifying the anger of others, denotes that you will labor
for the advancement of others.

If a lover dreams of soothing the jealous suspicions of his sweetheart,
he will find that his love will be unfortunately placed.

_Packet_.

To dream of seeing a packet coming in, foretells that some pleasant
recreation is in store for you.

To see one going out, you will experience slight losses and disappointments.

_Page_.

To see a page, denotes that you will contract a hasty union with one unsuited
to you.  You will fail to control your romantic impulses.

If a young woman dreams she acts as a page, it denotes that she
is likely to participate in some foolish escapade.

_Pagoda_.

To see a pagoda in your dreams, denotes that you will soon go
on a long desired journey.

If a young woman finds herself in a pagoda with her sweetheart,
many unforeseen events will transpire before her union is legalized.
An empty one, warns her of separation from her lover.

_Pail_.

To dream of full pails of milk, is a sign of fair prospects
and pleasant associations.

An empty pail is a sign of famine, or bad crops.

For a young woman to be carrying a pail, denotes household employment.

_Pain_.

To dream that you are in pain, will make sure of your own unhappiness.
This dream foretells useless regrets over some trivial transaction.

To see others in pain, warns you that you are making mistakes
in your life.

_Paint and Painting_.

To see newly painted houses in dreams, foretells that you will succeed
with some devised plan.

To have paint on your clothing, you will be made unhappy by the thoughtless
criticisms of others.

To dream that you use the brush yourself, denotes that you
will be well pleased with your present occupation.

To dream of seeing beautiful paintings, denotes that friends will assume
false positions towards you, and you will find that pleasure is illusive.

For a young woman to dream of painting a picture, she will be deceived
in her lover, as he will transfer his love to another.

_Palace_.[145]

Wandering through a palace and noting its grandeur, signifies that your
prospects are growing brighter and you will assume new dignity.

To see and hear fine ladies and men dancing and conversing, denotes that you
will engage in profitable and pleasing associations.

For a young woman of moderate means to dream that she is a
participant in the entertainment, and of equal social standing
with others, is a sign of her advancement through marriage,
or the generosity of relatives.

This is often a very deceitful and misleading dream to the young
woman of humble circumstances; as it is generally induced in such
cases by the unhealthy day dreams of her idle, empty brain.
She should strive after this dream, to live by honest work,
and restrain deceitful ambition by observing the fireside counsels
of mother, and friends.


[145] See Opulence.

_Palisade_.

To dream of the palisades, denotes that you will alter well-formed plans
to please strangers, and by so doing, you will impair your own interests.

_Pall_.

To dream that you see a pall, denotes that you will have
sorrow and misfortune.

If you raise the pall from a corpse, you will doubtless soon
mourn the death of one whom you love.

_Pall-bearer_.

To dream of a pall-bearer, indicates some enemy will provoke
your ill feeling, by constant attacks on your integrity.
If you see a pall-bearer, you will antagonize worthy institutions,
and make yourself obnoxious to friends.

_Pallet_.

To dream of a pallet, denotes that you will suffer temporary
uneasiness over your love affairs.  For a young woman,
it is a sign of a jealous rival.

_Palmistry_.

For a young woman to dream of palmistry, foretells she will be
the object of suspicion.

If she has her palms read, she will have many friends
of the opposite sex, but her own sex will condemn her.
If she reads others' hands, she will gain distinction by her
intelligent bearing.  If a minister's hand, she will need friends,
even in her elevation.

_Palm Tree_.

Palm trees seen in your dreams, are messages of hopeful situations
and happiness of a high order.

For a young woman to pass down an avenue of palms, omens a
cheerful home and a faithful husband.  If the palms are withered,
some unexpected sorrowful event will disturb her serenity.

_Palsy_.

To dream that you are afflicted with palsy, denotes that you
are making unstable contracts.

To see your friend so afflicted, there will be uncertainty
as to his faithfulness and sickness, too, may enter your home.

For lovers to dream that their sweethearts have palsy, signifies that
dissatisfaction over some question will mar their happiness.

_Pancake_.

To dream of eating pancakes, denotes that you will have excellent
success in all enterprises undertaken at this time.

To cook them, denotes that you will be economical and thrifty
in your home.

_Pane of Glass_.

To dream that you handle a pane of glass, denotes that you are dealing
in uncertainties.  If you break it, your failure will be accentuated.

To talk to a person through a pane of glass, denotes that there
are obstacles in your immediate future, and they will cause you
no slight inconvenience.

_Panorama_.

To dream of a panorama, denotes that you will change your
occupation or residence.  You should curb your inclinations
for change of scene and friends.

_Panther_.

To see a panther and experience fright, denotes that contracts in love
or business may be canceled unexpectedly, owing to adverse influences
working against your honor.  But killing, or over-powering it,
you will experience joy and be successful in your undertakings.
Your surroundings will take on fair prospects.

If one menaces you by its presence, you will have disappointments
in business.  Other people will likely recede from their promises to you.

If you hear the voice of a panther, and experience terror
or fright, you will have unfavorable news, coming in the way
of reducing profit or gain, and you may have social discord;
no fright forebodes less evil.

A panther, like the cat, seen in a dream, portends evil to the dreamer,
unless he kills it.

_Pantomime_.

To dream of seeing pantomimes, denotes that your friends will deceive you.
If you participate in them, you will have cause of offense.
Affairs will not prove satisfactory.

_Paper or parchment_.

If you have occasion in your dreams to refer to, or handle,
any paper or parchment, you will be threatened with losses.
They are likely to be in the nature of a lawsuit.
For a young woman, it means that she will be angry with her
lover and that she fears the opinion of acquaintances.
Beware, if you are married, of disagreements in the precincts
of the home.

_Parables_.

To dream of parables, denotes that you will be undecided as to the best
course to pursue in dissenting to some business complication.  To the lover,
or young woman, this is a prophecy of misunderstandings and disloyalty.

_Paradise_.

To dream that you are in Paradise, means loyal friends, who are
willing to aid you.  This dream holds out bright hopes to sailors
or those about to make a long voyage.  To mothers, this means
fair and obedient children.  If you are sick and unfortunate,
you will have a speedy recovery and your fortune will ripen.
To lovers, it is the promise of wealth and faithfulness.

To dream that you start to Paradise and find yourself bewildered and lost,
you will undertake enterprises which look exceedingly feasible and full
of fortunate returns, but which will prove disappointing and vexatious.

_Paralysis_.

Paralysis is a bad dream, denoting financial reverses and disappointment
in literary attainment.  To lovers, it portends a cessation of affections.

_Parasol_.[146]

To dream of a parasol, denotes, for married people, illicit enjoyments.

If a young woman has this dream, she will engage in many flirtations,
some of which will cause her interesting disturbances, lest her lover
find out her inclinations.


[146] See Umbrella.

_Parcel_.

To dream of a parcel being delivered to you, denotes that you
will be pleasantly surprised by the return of some absent one,
or be cared for in a worldly way.

If you carry a parcel, you will have some unpleasant task to perform.

To let a parcel fall on the way as you go to deliver it,
you will see some deal fail to go through.

_Pardon_.[147]

To dream that you are endeavoring to gain pardon for an offense
which you never committed, denotes that you will be troubled,
and seemingly with cause, over your affairs, but it will finally
appear that it was for your advancement.  If offense was committed,
you will realize embarrassment in affairs.

To receive pardon, you will prosper after a series of misfortunes.


[147] See kindred words.

_Parents_.[148]

To see your parents looking cheerful while dreaming, denotes harmony
and pleasant associates.

If they appear to you after they are dead, it is a warning of
approaching trouble, and you should be particular of your dealings.

To see them while they are living, and they seem to be
in your home and happy, denotes pleasant changes for you.
To a young woman, this usually brings marriage and prosperity.
If pale and attired in black, grave disappointments will harass you.

To dream of seeing your parents looking robust and contented, denotes you are
under fortunate environments; your business and love interests will flourish.
If they appear indisposed or sad, you will find life's favors passing you
by without recognition.


[148] See Father and Mother.

_Park_.

To dream of walking through a well-kept park, denotes enjoyable leisure.
If you walk with your lover, you will be comfortably and happily married.
Ill-kept parks, devoid of green grasses and foliage, is ominous
of unexpected reverses.

_Parrot_.

Parrots chattering in your dreams, signifies frivolous employments and idle
gossip among your friends.

To see them in repose, denotes a peaceful intermission of family broils.

For a young woman to dream that she owns a parrot, denotes that her lover
will believe her to be quarrelsome.

To teach a parrot, you will have trouble in your private affairs.

A dead parrot, foretells the loss of social friends.

_Parsley_.

To dream of parsley, denotes hard-earned success, usually the surroundings
of the dreamer are healthful and lively.

To eat parsley, is a sign of good health, but the care of a large
family will be your portion.

_Parsnips_.

To see or eat parsnips, is a favorable omen of successful business or trade,
but love will take on unfavorable and gloomy aspects.

_Parting_.

To dream of parting with friends and companions, denotes that many little
vexations will come into your daily life.

If you part with enemies, it is a sign of success in love and business.

_Partner_.

To dream of seeing your business partner with a basket of crockery
on his back, and, letting it fall, gets it mixed with other crockery,
denotes your business will sustain a loss through the indiscriminate
dealings of your partner.  If you reprimand him for it, you will,
to some extent, recover the loss.

_Partnership_.

To dream of forming a partnership with a man, denotes uncertain
and fluctuating money affairs.  If your partner be a woman,
you will engage in some enterprise which you will endeavor
to keep hidden from friends.

To dissolve an unpleasant partnership, denotes that things will arrange
themselves agreeable to your desires; but if the partnership was pleasant,
there will be disquieting news and disagreeable turns in your affairs.

_Partridge_.

Partridges seen in your dreams, denotes that conditions will be
good in your immediate future for the accumulation of property.

To ensnare them, signifies that you will be fortunate in expectations.

To kill them, foretells that you will be successful, but much
of your wealth will be given to others.

To eat them, signifies the enjoyment of deserved honors.

To see them flying, denotes that a promising future is before you.

_Party_.

To dream of an unknown party of men assaulting you for your money
or valuables, denotes that you will have enemies banded together against you.
If you escape uninjured, you will overcome any opposition, either in
business or love.

To dream of attending a party of any kind for pleasure, you will find
that life has much good, unless the party is an inharmonious one.

_Passenger_.

To dream that you see passengers coming in with their luggage,
denotes improvement in your surroundings.  If they are leaving
you will lose an opportunity of gaining some desired property.
If you are one of the passengers leaving home, you will be
dissatisfied with your present living and will seek to change it.

_Passing Bell_.

To hear a passing bell, unexpected intelligence of the sorrow
or illness of the absent.

To ring one yourself, denotes ill health and reverses.

_Password_.

To dream of a password, foretells you will have influential aid
in some slight trouble soon to attack you.  For a woman to dream
that she has given away the password, signifies she will endanger
her own standing through seeking frivolous or illicit desires.

_Pasteboard_.

To dream of pasteboard, denotes that unfaithful friends will deceive
you concerning important matters.  To cut pasteboard, you will throw
aside difficulties in your struggle to reach eminent positions.

_Pastry_.[149]

To dream of pastry, denotes that you will be deceived by some artful person.

To eat it, implies heartfelt friendships.

If a young woman dreams that she is cooking it, she will fail
to deceive others as to her real intentions.


[149] See Pies.

_Patch_.

To dream that you have patches upon your clothing, denotes that you
will show no false pride in the discharge of obligations.

To see others wearing patches, denotes want and misery are near.

If a young woman discovers a patch on her new dress, it indicates
that she will find trouble facing her when she imagines her happiest
moments are approaching near.  If she tries to hide the patches,
she will endeavor to keep some ugly trait in her character from her lover.
If she is patching, she will assume duties for which she has no liking.

For a woman to do family patching, denotes close and loving bonds
in the family, but a scarcity of means is portended.

_Patent_.

To dream of securing a patent, denotes that you will be careful
and painstaking with any task you set about to accomplish.
If you fail in securing your patent, you will suffer failure
for the reason that you are engaging in enterprises for which you
have no ability.

If you buy one, you will have occasion to make a tiresome
and fruitless journey.

To see one, you will suffer unpleasantness from illness.

_Patent Medicine_.

To dream that you resort to patent medicine in your search for health,
denotes that you will use desperate measures in advancing your fortune,
but you will succeed, to the disappointment of the envious.

To see or manufacture patent medicines, you will rise from obscurity
to positions above your highest imaginings.

_Path_.

To dream that you are walking in a narrow and rough path,
stumbling over rocks and other obstructions, denotes that you
will have a rough encounter with adversity, and feverish
excitement will weigh heavily upon you.

To dream that you are trying to find your path, foretells that you will fail
to accomplish some work that you have striven to push to desired ends.

To walk through a pathway bordered with green grass and flowers,
denotes your freedom from oppressing loves.

_Paunch_.

To see a large paunch, denotes wealth and the total absence of refinement.

To see a shriveled paunch, foretells illness and reverses.

_Pauper_.[150]

To dream that you are a pauper, implies unpleasant happenings for you.

To see paupers, denotes that there will be a call upon your generosity.


[150] See Beggars and kindred words.

_Pawn-shop_.

If in your dreams you enter a pawn-shop, you will find disappointments
and losses in your waking moments.

To pawn articles, you will have unpleasant scenes with your wife
or sweetheart, and perhaps disappointments in business.

For a woman to go to a pawn-shop, denotes that she is guilty of indiscretions,
and she is likely to regret the loss of a friend.

To redeem an article, denotes that you will regain lost positions.

To dream that you see a pawn-shop, denotes you are negligent
of your trust and are in danger of sacrificing your honorable
name in some salacious affair.

_Peaches_.[151]

Dreaming of seeing or eating peaches, implies the sickness of children,
disappointing returns in business, and failure to make anticipated
visits of pleasure; but if you see them on trees with foliage,
you will secure some desired position or thing after much striving
and risking of health and money.

To see dried peaches, denotes that enemies will steal from you.

For a young woman to dream of gathering luscious peaches from
well-filled trees, she will, by her personal charms and qualifications,
win a husband rich in worldly goods and wise in travel.
If the peaches prove to be green and knotty, she will meet
with unkindness from relatives and ill health will steal
away her attractions.


[151] See Orchard.

_Peacock_.

For persons dreaming of peacocks, there lies below the brilliant
and flashing ebb and flow of the stream of pleasure and riches,
the slums of sorrow and failure, which threaten to mix with its
clearness at the least disturbing influence.

For a woman to dream that she owns peacocks, denotes that she
will be deceived in her estimate of man's honor.

To hear their harsh voices while looking upon their proudly spread plumage,
denotes that some beautiful and well-appearing person will work you discomfort
and uneasiness of mind.

_Pearls_.

To dream of pearls, is a forerunner of good business and trade
and affairs of social nature.

If a young woman dreams that her lover sends her gifts of pearls,
she will indeed be most fortunate, as there will be occasions of
festivity and pleasure for her, besides a loving and faithful affianced
devoid of the jealous inclinations so ruinous to the peace of lovers.
If she loses or breaks her pearls, she will suffer indescribable
sadness and sorrow through bereavement or misunderstandings.
To find herself admiring them, she will covet and strive for love
or possessions with a pureness of purpose.

_Pears_.

To dream of eating pears, denotes poor success and debilitating health.

To admire the golden fruit upon graceful trees, denotes that fortune
will wear a more promising aspect than formerly.

To dream of gathering them, denotes pleasant surprises will follow
quickly upon disappointment.

To preserve them, denotes that you will take reverses philosophically.

Baking them, denotes insipid love and friendships.

_Peas_.

Dreaming of eating peas, augurs robust health and the accumulation of wealth.
Much activity is indicated for farmers and their women folks.

To see them growing, denotes fortunate enterprises.

To plant them, denotes that your hopes are well grounded and they
will be realized.

To gather them, signifies that your plans will culminate in good and you
will enjoy the fruits of your labors.

To dream of canned peas, denotes that your brightest hopes
will be enthralled in uncertainties for a short season,
but they will finally be released by fortune.

To see dried peas, denotes that you are overtaxing your health.

To eat dried peas, foretells that you will, after much success,
suffer a slight decrease in pleasure or wealth.

_Pebbles_.

For a young woman to dream of a pebble-strewn walk, she will be vexed
with many rivals and find that there are others with charms that attract
besides her own.  She who dreams of pebbles is selfish and should cultivate
leniency towards others' faults.

_Pecans_.

To dream of eating this appetizing nut, you will see one of your dearest
plans come to full fruition, and seeming failure prove a prosperous
source of gain.

To see them growing among leaves, signifies a long, peaceful existence.
Failure in love or business will follow in proportion as the pecan is decayed.

If they are difficult to crack and the fruit is small, you will succeed
after much trouble and expense, but returns will be meagre.

_Pelican_.

To dream of a pelican, denotes a mingling of disappointments with successes.

To catch one, you will be able to overcome disappointing influences.

To kill one, denotes that you will cruelly set aside the rights of others.

To see them flying, you are threatened with changes, which will impress
you with ideas of uncertainty as to good.

_Pen_.

To dream of a pen, foretells you are unfortunately being
led into serious complications by your love of adventure.
If the pen refuses to write, you will be charged with a serious
breach of morality.

_Penalties_.

To dream that you have penalties imposed upon you, foretells that you
will have duties that will rile you and find you rebellious.

To pay a penalty, denotes sickness and financial loss.
To escape the payment, you will be victor in some contest.

_Pencil_.

To dream of pencils, denotes favorable occupations.
For a young woman to write with one, foretells she will
be fortunate in marriage, if she does not rub out words;
in that case, she will be disappointed in her lover.

_Penitentiary_.

To dream of a penitentiary, denotes you will have engagements
which will, unfortunately, result in your loss.  To be an inmate
of one, foretells discontent in the home and failing business.
To escape from one, you will overcome difficult obstacles.

_Penny_.

To dream of pennies, denotes unsatisfactory pursuits.
Business will suffer, and lovers and friends will complain
of the smallness of affection.

To lose them, signifies small deference and failures.

To find them, denotes that prospects will advance to your improvement.

To count pennies, foretells that you will be business-like and economical.

_Pension_.

To dream of drawing a pension, foretells that you will be aided
in your labors by friends.

To fail in your application for a pension, denotes that you will lose
in an undertaking and suffer the loss of friendships.

_People_.[152]


[152] See Crowd.

_Pepper_.

To dream of pepper burning your tongue, foretells that you will suffer
from your acquaintances through your love of gossip.

To see red pepper growing, foretells for you a thrifty and an independent
partner in the marriage state.

To see piles of red pepper pods, signifies that you will aggressively
maintain your rights.

To grind black pepper, denotes that you will be victimized by the wiles
of ingenious men or women.  To see it in stands on the table, omens sharp
reproaches or quarrels.

For a young woman to put it on her food, foretells that she will be deceived
by her friends.

_Peppermint_.

To dream of peppermint, denotes pleasant entertainments
and interesting affairs.

To see it growing, denotes that you will participate in some pleasure
in which there will be a dash of romance.

To enjoy drinks in which there is an effusion of peppermint, denotes that
you will enjoy assignations with some attractive and fascinating person.
To a young woman, this dream warns her against seductive pleasures.

_Perfume_.

To dream of inhaling perfume, is an augury of happy incidents.

For you to perfume your garments and person, denotes that you
will seek and obtain adulation.

Being oppressed by it to intoxication, denotes that excesses in joy
will impair your mental qualities.

To spill perfume, denotes that you will lose something which
affords you pleasure.

To break a bottle of perfume, foretells that your most cherished
wishes and desires will end disastrously, even while they promise
a happy culmination.

To dream that you are distilling perfume, denotes that your employments
and associations will be of the pleasantest character.

For a young woman to dream of perfuming her bath, foretells
ecstatic happenings.  If she receives it as a gift from a man,
she will experience fascinating, but dangerous pleasures.

_Perspiration_.

To dream that you are in a perspiration, foretells that you
will come out of some difficulty, which has caused much gossip,
with new honors.

_Pest_.

To dream of being worried over a pest of any nature, foretells that disturbing
elements will prevail in your immediate future.

To see others thus worried, denotes that you will be annoyed
by some displeasing development.

_Petticoat_.

To dream of seeing new petticoats, denotes that pride in your belongings
will make you an object of raillery among your acquaintances.

To see them soiled or torn, portends that your reputation will be
in great danger.

If a young woman dream that she wears silken, or clean, petticoats,
it denotes that she will have a doting, but manly husband.
If she suddenly perceives that she has left off her petticoat
in dressing, it portends much ill luck and disappointment.
To see her petticoat falling from its place while she is
at some gathering, or while walking, she will have trouble
in retaining her lover, and other disappointments may follow.

_Pewter_.[153]

To dream of pewter, foretells straitened circumstances.


[153] See Dishes.

_Phantom_.[154]

To dream that a phantom pursues you, foretells strange
and disquieting experiences.

To see a phantom fleeing from you, foretells that trouble
will assume smaller proportions.


[154] See Ghost.

_Pheasant_.

Dreaming of pheasants, omens good fellowship among your friends.

To eat one, signifies that the jealousy of your wife will cause
you to forego friendly intercourse with your friends.

To shoot them, denotes that you will fail to sacrifice one selfish pleasure
for the comfort of friends.

_Phosphorus_.

To dream of seeing phosphorus, is indicative of evanescent joys.

For a young woman, it foretells a brilliant but brief success with admirers.

_Photography_.

If you see photographs in your dreams, it is a sign of approaching deception.

If you receive the photograph of your lover, you are warned
that he is not giving you his undivided loyalty, while he tries
to so impress you.

For married people to dream of the possession of other persons'
photographs, foretells unwelcome disclosures of one's conduct.

To dream that you are having your own photograph made, foretells that you
will unwarily cause yourself and others' trouble.

_Physician_.

For a young woman to dream of a physician, denotes that she
is sacrificing her beauty in engaging in frivolous pastimes.
If she is sick and thus dreams, she will have sickness or worry,
but will soon overcome them, unless the physician appears very anxious,
and then her trials may increase, ending in loss and sorrow.

_Piano_.

To dream of seeing a piano, denotes some joyful occasion.

To hear sweet and voluptuous harmony from a piano,
signals success and health.  If discordant music is being played,
you will have many exasperating matters to consider.
Sad and plaintive music, foretells sorrowful tidings.

To find your piano broken and out of tune, portends dissatisfaction
with your own accomplishments and disappointment in the failure
of your friends or children to win honors.

To see an old-fashioned piano, denotes that you have, in trying moments,
neglected the advices and opportunities of the past, and are warned
not to do so again.

For a young woman to dream that she is executing difficult,
but entrancing music, she will succeed in winning an indifferent
friend to be a most devoted and loyal lover.

_Pickaxe_.

To dream of a pickaxe, denotes a relentless enemy is working to overthrow
you socially.  A broken one, implies disaster to all your interests.

_Pickles_.

To dream of pickles, denotes that you will follow worthless pursuits if you
fail to call energy and judgment to your aid.

For a young woman to dream of eating pickles, foretells an unambitious career.

To dream of pickles, denotes vexation in love, but final triumph.

For a young woman to dream that she is eating them, or is hungry
for them, foretells she will find many rivals, and will be overcome
unless she is careful of her private affairs.  Impure pickles,
indicate disappointing engagements and love quarrels.

_Pickpocket_.

To dream of a pickpocket, foretells some enemy will succeed
in harassing and causing you loss.  For a young woman to have her
pocket picked, denotes she will be the object of some person's
envy and spite, and may lose the regard of a friend through
these evil machinations, unless she keeps her own counsel.
If she picks others' pockets, she will incur the displeasure
of a companion by her coarse behavior.

_Picnic_.[155]

To dream of attending a picnic, foreshadows success and real enjoyment.

Dreams of picnics, bring undivided happiness to the young.

Storms, or any interfering elements at a picnic, implies the temporary
displacement of assured profit and pleasure in love or business.


[155] See Kindred Words.

_Pictures_.[156]

Pictures appearing before you in dreams, prognosticate deception
and the ill will of contemporaries.

To make a picture, denotes that you will engage in
some unremunerative enterprise.

To destroy pictures, means that you will be pardoned for using
strenuous means to establish your rights.

To buy them, foretells worthless speculation.

To dream of seeing your likeness in a living tree, appearing and disappearing,
denotes that you will be prosperous and seemingly contented, but there
will be disappointments in reaching out for companionship and reciprocal
understanding of ideas and plans.

To dream of being surrounded with the best efforts of the old
and modern masters, denotes that you will have insatiable longings
and desires for higher attainments, compared to which present
success will seem poverty-stricken and miserable.


[156] See Painting and Photographs.

_Pier_.

To stand upon a pier in your dream, denotes that you will be
brave in your battle for recognition in prosperity's realm,
and that you will be admitted to the highest posts of honor.

If you strive to reach a pier and fail, you will lose the distinction
you most coveted.

_Pies_.[157]

To dream of eating pies, you will do well to watch your enemies,
as they are planning to injure you.

For a young woman to dream of making pies, denotes that she will flirt
with men for pastime.  She should accept this warning.


[157] See Pastry.

_Pig_.[158]

To dream of a fat, healthy pig, denotes reasonable success in affairs.
If they are wallowing in mire, you will have hurtful associates,
and your engagements will be subject to reproach.  This dream will bring
to a young woman a jealous and greedy companion though the chances
are that he will be wealthy.


[158] See Hog.

_Pigeon_.

To dream of seeing pigeons and hearing them cooing above their cotes,
denotes domestic peace and pleasure-giving children.  For a young woman,
this dream indicates an early and comfortable union.

To see them being used in a shooting match, and, if you participate,
it denotes that cruelty in your nature will show in your dealings,
and you are warned of low and debasing pleasures.

To see them flying, denotes freedom from misunderstanding,
and perhaps news from the absent.

_Pilgrim_.

To dream of pilgrims, denotes that you will go on an extended journey,
leaving home and its dearest objects in the mistaken idea that it must
be thus for their good.

To dream that you are a pilgrim, portends struggles with poverty
and unsympathetic companions.

For a young woman to dream that a pilgrim approaches her,
she will fall an easy dupe to deceit.  If he leaves her,
she will awaken to her weakness of character and strive
to strengthen independent thought.

_Pill_.

To dream that you take pills, denotes that you will have responsibilities
to look after, but they will bring you no little comfort and enjoyment.

To give them to others, signifies that you will be criticised
for your disagreeableness.

_Pillow_.

To dream of a pillow, denotes luxury and comfort.

For a young woman to dream that she makes a pillow, she will have encouraging
prospects of a pleasant future.

_Pimple_.

To dream of your flesh being full of pimples, denotes worry over trifles.

To see others with pimples on them, signifies that you will be troubled
with illness and complaints from others.

For a woman to dream that her beauty is marred by pimples, her conduct
in home or social circles will be criticised by friends and acquaintances.
You may have small annoyances to follow this dream.

_Pincers_.

To dream of feeling pincers on your flesh, denotes that you
will be burdened with exasperating cares.  Any dream of pincers,
signifies unfortunate incidents.

_Pineapple_.

To dream of pineapples, is exceedingly propitious.
Success will follow in the near future, if you gather pineapples
or eat them.

To dream that you prick your fingers while preparing a pineapple
for the table, you will experience considerable vexation over matters
which will finally bring pleasure and success.

_Pine Tree_.

To see a pine tree in a dream, foretells unvarying success
in any undertaking.  Dead pine, for a woman, represents
bereavement and cares.

_Pins_.

To dream of pins, augurs differences and quarrels ill families.

To a young woman, they warn her of unladylike conduct towards her lover.

To dream of swallowing a pin, denotes that accidents will force
you into perilous conditions.

To lose one, implies a petty loss or disagreement.

To see a bent or rusty pin, signifies that you will lose esteem
because of your careless ways.

To stick one into your flesh, denotes that some person will irritate you.

_Pipe_.

Pipes seen in dreams, are representatives of peace and comfort
after many struggles.

Sewer, gas, and such like pipes, denotes unusual thought and prosperity
in your community.

Old and broken pipe, signifies ill health and stagnation of business.

To dream that you smoke a pipe, denotes that you will enjoy the visit of an
old friend, and peaceful settlements of differences will also take place.

_Pirate_.

To dream of pirates, denotes that you will be exposed to the evil
designs of false friends.

To dream that you are a pirate, denotes that you will fall beneath
the society of friends and former equals.

For a young woman to dream that her lover is a pirate, is a sign
of his unworthiness and deceitfulness.  If she is captured by pirates,
she will be induced to leave her home under false pretenses.

_Pistol_.

Seeing a pistol in your dream, denotes bad fortune, generally.

If you own one, you will cultivate a low, designing character.

If you hear the report of one, you will be made aware of some scheme
to ruin your interests.

To dream of shooting off your pistol, signifies that you will
bear some innocent person envy, and you will go far to revenge
the imagined wrong.

_Pit_.

If you are looking into a deep pit in your dream, you will run silly risks
in business ventures and will draw uneasiness about your wooing.

To fall into a pit denotes calamity and deep sorrow.
To wake as you begin to feel yourself falling into the pit,
brings you out of distress in fairly good shape.

To dream that you are descending into one, signifies that you
will knowingly risk health and fortune for greater success.

_Pitcher_.

To dream of a pitcher, denotes that you will be of a generous
and congenial disposition.  Success will attend your efforts.

A broken pitcher, denotes loss of friends.

_Pitchfork_.

Pitchforks in dreams, denotes struggles for betterment of fortune
and great laboring, either physically or mentally.

To dream that you are attacked by some person using a pitchfork,
implies that you will have personal enemies who would not scruple
to harm you.

_Plague_.

To dream of a plague raging, denotes disappointing returns in business,
and your wife or lover will lead you a wretched existence.

If you are afflicted with the plague, you will keep your
business out of embarrassment with the greatest maneuvering.
If you are trying to escape it, some trouble, which looks impenetrable,
is pursuing you.

_Plain_.[159]

For a young woman to dream of crossing a plain, denotes that she
will be fortunately situated, if the grasses are green and luxuriant;
if they are arid, or the grass is dead, she will have much
discomfort and loneliness.


[159] See Prairie.

_Plane_.

To dream that you use a plane, denotes that your liberality and successful
efforts will be highly commended.

To see carpenters using their planes, denotes that you will progress
smoothly in your undertakings.

To dream of seeing planes, denotes congeniality and even success.

A love of the real, and not the false, is portended by this dream.

_Planet_.

To dream of a planet, foretells an uncomfortable journey and depressing work.

_Plank_.

For a young woman to dream that she is walking across muddy water
on a rotten plank, denotes that she will feel keenly the indifference
shown her by one she loves, or other troubles may arise;
or her defence of honor may be in danger of collapse.

Walking a good, sound plank, is a good omen, but a person will have
to be unusually careful in conduct after such a dream.

_Plaster_.

To dream of seeing walls plainly plastered, denotes that success will come,
but it will not be stable.

To have plaster fall upon you, denotes unmitigated disasters and disclosure.

To see plasterers at work, denotes that you will have a sufficient
competency to live above penury.

_Plate_.[160]

For a woman to dream of plates, denotes that she will practise economy and win
a worthy husband.  If already married, she will retain her husband's love
and respect by the wise ordering of his household.


[160] See Dishes.

_Play_.[161]

For a young woman to dream that she attends a play,
foretells that she will be courted by a genial friend,
and will marry to further her prospects and pleasure seeking.
If there is trouble in getting to and from the play,
or discordant and hideous scenes, she will be confronted
with many displeasing surprises.


[161] See Theater.

_Pleasure_.[162]

To dream of pleasure, denotes gain and personal enjoyment.


[162] See Joy.

_Plow_.

To dream of a plow, signifies unusual success, and affairs will reach
a pleasing culmination.

To see persons plowing, denotes activity and advancement
in knowledge and fortune.

For a young woman to see her lover plowing, indicates that she will have
a noble and wealthy husband.  Her joys will be deep and lasting.

To plow yourself, denotes rapid increase in property and joys.

_Plums_.

Plums, if they are green, unless seen on trees, are signs of personal
and relative discomfort.

To see them ripe, denotes joyous occasions, which, however, will be
of short duration.

To eat them, denotes that you will engage in flirtations
and other evanescent pleasures.

To gather them, you will obtain your desires, but they will not prove
so solid as you had imagined.

If you find yourself gathering them up from the ground, and find rotten
ones among the good, you will be forced to admit that your expectations
are unrealized, and that there is no life filled with pleasure alone.

_Pocket_.

To dream of your pocket, is a sign of evil demonstrations against you.

_Pocketbook_.

To find a pocketbook filled with bills and money in your dreams,
you will be quite lucky, gaining in nearly every instance your desire.
If empty, you will be disappointed in some big hope.

If you lose your pocketbook, you will unfortunately disagree with your
best friend, and thereby lose much comfort and real gain.

_Poinard_.[163]

To dream of some one stabbing you with a poinard, denotes that secret
enemies will cause you uneasiness of mind.

If you attack any person with one of these weapons, you will unfortunately
suspect your friends of unfaithfulness.

Dreaming of poinards, omens evil.


[163] See Dagger.

_Poison_.

To fed that you are poisoned in a dream, denotes that some painful
influence will immediately reach you.

If you seek to use poison on others, you will be guilty of base thoughts,
or the world will go wrong for you.

For a young woman to dream that she endeavors to rid herself
of a rival in this way, she will be likely to have a deal
of trouble in securing a lover.

To throw the poison away, denotes that by sheer force you
will overcome unsatisfactory conditions.

To handle poison, or see others with it, signifies that unpleasantness
will surround you.

To dream that your relatives or children are poisoned, you will receive
injury from unsuspected sources.

If an enemy or rival is poisoned, you will overcome obstacles.

To recover from the effects of poison, indicates that you
will succeed after worry.

To take strychnine or other poisonous medicine under the advice
of a physician, denotes that you will undertake some affair
fraught with danger.

_Poker_.

To dream of seeing a red hot poker, or fighting with one,
signifies that you will meet trouble with combative energy.

To play at poker, warns you against evil company; and young women,
especially, will lose their moral distinctiveness if they find
themselves engaged in this game.

_Polar Bear_.[164]

Polar bears in dreams, are prognostic of deceit,
as misfortune will approach you in a seeming fair aspect.
Your bitterest enemies will wear the garb of friendship.
Rivals will try to supersede you.

To see the skin of one, denotes that you will successfully
overcome any opposition.


[164] See Bear.

_Pole-cat_.

To dream of a pole-cat, signifies salacious scandals.

To inhale the odor of a pole-cat on your clothes, or otherwise smell one,
you will find that your conduct will be considered rude, and your affairs
will prove unsatisfactory.

To kill one, denotes that you will overcome formidable obstacles.

_Police_.

If the police are trying to arrest you for some crime of which you
are innocent, it foretells that you will successfully outstrip rivalry.

If the arrest is just, you will have a season of unfortunate incidents.

To see police on parole, indicates alarming fluctuations in affairs.

_Polishing_.

To dream of polishing any article, high attainments will place
you in enviable positions.

_Politician_.

To dream of a politician, denotes displeasing companionships,
and incidences where you will lose time and means.

If you engage in political wrangling, it portends that misunderstandings
and ill feeling will be shown you by friends.

For a young woman to dream of taking interest in politics,
warns her against designing duplicity,

_Polka_.[165]

To dream of dancing the polka, denotes pleasant occupations.


[165] See Dancing.

_Pomegranate_.

Pomegranates, when dreamed of, denotes that you will wisely use
your talents for the enrichment of the mind rather than seeking
those pleasures which destroy morality and health.

If your sweetheart gives you one, you will be lured by artful
wiles to the verge of distraction by woman's charms, but inner
forces will hold you safe from thralldom.

To eat one, signifies that you will yield yourself a captive
to the personal charms of another.

_Pond_.[166]

To see a pond in your dream, denotes that events will bring no emotion,
and fortune will retain a placid outlook.

If the pond is muddy, you will have domestic quarrels.


[166] See Water Puddle and kindred words.

_Pony_.

To see ponies in your dreams, signifies moderate speculations
will be rewarded with success.

_Poor_.[167]

To dream that you, or any of your friends, appear to be poor,
is significant of worry and losses.


[167] See Pauper.

_Poor-house_.

To see a poor-house in your dream, denotes you have unfaithful friends,
who will care for you only as they can use your money and belongings.

_Pope_.

Any dream in which you see the Pope, without speaking to him,
warns you of servitude.  You will bow to the will of some master,
even to that of women.

To speak to the Pope, denotes that certain high honors are in store for you.
To see the Pope looking sad or displeased, warns you against vice or sorrow
of some kind.

_Poplars_.

To dream of seeing poplars, is an omen of good, if they are in leaf or bloom.

For a young woman to stand by her lover beneath the blossoms and leaves
of a tulip poplar, she will realize her most extravagant hopes.

Her lover will be handsome and polished.  Wealth and friends will be hers.
If they are leafless and withered, she will meet with disappointments.

_Poppies_.

Poppies seen in dreams, represents a season of seductive pleasures
and flattering business, but they all occupy unstable foundations.

If you inhale the odor of one, you will be the victim of artful
persuasions and flattery.

(The mesmeric influence of the poppy inducts one into strange atmospheres,
leaving materiality behind while the subjective self explores these realms
as in natural sleep; yet these dreams do not bear truthful warnings
to the material man.  Being, in a manner, enforced.)

_Porcelain_.

To dream of porcelain, signifies you will have favorable opportunities
of progressing in your affairs.  To see it broken or soiled,
denotes mistakes will be made which will cause grave offense.

_Porch_.

To dream of a porch, denotes that you will engage a new undertakings,
and the future will be full of uncertainties.

If a young woman dreams that she is with her lover on a porch,
implies her doubts of some one's intentions.

To dream that you build a porch, you will assume new duties.

_Porcupine_.

To see a porcupine in your dreams, denotes that you will disapprove
any new enterprise and repel new friendships with coldness.

For a young woman to dream of a porcupine, portends that she
will fear her lover.

To see a dead one, signifies your abolishment of ill feelings and possessions.

_Pork_.[168]

If you eat pork in your dreams, you will encounter real trouble,
but if you only see pork, you will come out of a conflict victoriously.


[168] See Bacon.

_Porpoise_.

To see a porpoise in your dreams, denotes enemies are thrusting
your interest aside, through your own inability to keep people
interested in you.

_Porter_.

Seeing a porter in a dream, denotes decided bad luck and eventful happenings.

To imagine yourself a porter, denotes humble circumstances.

To hire one, you will be able to enjoy whatever success comes to you.

To discharge one, signifies that disagreeable charges will be
preferred against you.

_Portfolio_.

To dream of a portfolio, denotes that your employment will not be
to your liking, and you will seek a change in your location.

_Portrait_.[169]

To dream of gazing upon the portrait of some beautiful person,
denotes that, while you enjoy pleasure, you can but feel
the disquieting and treacherousness of such joys.  Your general
affairs will suffer loss after dreaming of portraits.


[169] See Pictures, Photographs, and Paintings.

_Postage_.

To dream of postage stamps, denotes system and remuneration in business.

If you try to use cancelled stamps, you will fall into disrepute.

To receive stamps, signifies a rapid rise to distinction.

To see torn stamps, denotes that there are obstacles in your way.

_Postman_.[170]

To dream of a postman, denotes that hasty news will more frequently
be of a distressing nature than otherwise.


[170] See Letter Carrier.

_Post-office_.

To dream of a post-office, is a sign of unpleasant tidings.
and ill luck generally.

_Pot_.

To dream of a pot, foretells that unimportant events will work you vexation.
For a young woman to see a boiling pot, omens busy employment of pleasant and
social duties.  To see a broken or rusty one, implies that keen disappointment
will be experienced by you.

_Potatoes_.

Dreaming of potatoes, brings incidents often of good.

To dream of digging them, denotes success.

To dream of eating them, you will enjoy substantial gain.

To cook them, congenial employment.

Planting them, brings realization of desires.

To see them rotting, denotes vanished pleasure and a darkening future.

_Potter_.

To dream of a potter, denotes constant employment,
with satisfactory results.  For a young woman to see a potter,
foretells she will enjoy pleasant engagements.

_Potter's Field_.

To see a potter's field in your dreams, denotes you will have poverty
and misery to distress you.  For a young woman to walk through a potter's
field with her lover, she will give up the one she loves in the hope
of mercenary gain.

_Poultry_.

To see dressed poultry in a dream, foretells extravagant
habits will reduce your security in money matters.
For a young woman to dream that she is chasing live poultry,
foretells she will devote valuable time to frivolous pleasure.

_Powder_.

To see powder in your dreams, denotes unscrupulous people are dealing
with you.  You may detect them through watchfulness.

_Prairie_.

To dream of a prairie, denotes that you will enjoy ease,
and even luxury and unobstructed progress.

An undulating prairie, covered with growing grasses and flowers,
signifies joyous happenings.

A barren prairie, represents loss and sadness through the absence of friends.

To be lost on one, is a sign of sadness and ill luck.

_Prayer_.

To dream of saying prayers, or seeing others doing so,
foretells you will be threatened with failure, which will take
strenuous efforts to avert.

_Preacher_.

To dream of a preacher, denotes that your ways are not above reproach,
and your affairs will not move evenly.

To dream that you are a preacher, foretells for you losses in business,
and distasteful amusements will jar upon you.

To hear preaching, implies that you will undergo misfortune.

To argue with a preacher, you will lose in some contest.

To see one walk away from you, denotes that your affairs will move
with new energy.  If he looks sorrowful, reproaches will fall
heavily upon you.

To see a long-haired preacher, denotes that you are shortly to have disputes
with overbearing and egotistical people.

_Precipice_.[171]

To dream of standing over a yawning precipice, portends the threatenings
of misfortunes and calamities.

To fall over a precipice, denotes that you will be engulfed in disaster.


[171] See Abyss and Pit.

_Pregnancy_.

For a woman to dream that she is pregnant, denotes she will be unhappy
with her husband, and her children will be unattractive.

For a virgin, this dream omens scandal and adversity.
If a woman is really pregnant and has this dream, it prognosticates
a safe delivery and swift recovery of strength.

_Present_.[172]

To receive presents in your dreams, denotes that you will
be unusually fortunate.


[172] See Gifts.

_Priest_.[173]

A priest is an augury of ill, if seen in dreams.

If he is in the pulpit, it denotes sickness and trouble for the dreamer.

If a woman dreams that she is in love with a priest,
it warns her of deceptions and an unscrupulous lover.
If the priest makes love to her, she will be reproached for her
love of gaiety and practical joking.

To confess to a priest, denotes that you will be subjected
to humiliation and sorrow.

These dreams imply that you have done, or will do,
something which will bring discomfort to yourself or relatives.
The priest or preacher is your spiritual adviser, and any dream of his
professional presence is a warning against your own imperfections.
Seen in social circles, unless they rise before you as spectres,
the same rules will apply as to other friends.


[173] See Preacher.

_Primrose_.

To dream of this little flower starring the grass at your feet,
is an omen of joys laden with comfort and peace.

_Printer_.

To see a printer in your dreams, is a warning of poverty,
if you neglect to practice economy and cultivate energy.
For a woman to dream that her lover or associate is a printer,
foretells she will fail to please her parents in the selection
of a close friend.

_Printing Office_.

To be in a printing office in dreams, denotes that slander and contumely
will threaten you

To run a printing office is indicative of hard luck.

For a young woman to dream that her sweetheart is connected
with a printing office, denotes that she will have a lover
who is unable to lavish money or time upon her, and she will
not be sensible enough to see why he is so stingy.

_Prison_.[174]

To dream of a prison, is the forerunner of misfortune in every instance,
if it encircles your friends, or yourself.

To see any one dismissed from prison, denotes that you will
finally overcome misfortune.


[174] See Jail.

_Privacy_.

To dream that your privacy suffers intrusion, foretells you
will have overbearing people to worry you.  For a woman,
this dream warns her to look carefully after private affairs.
If she intrudes on the privacy of her husband or lover,
she will disabuse some one's confidence, if not careful
of her conversation.

_Prize Fight_.

To see a prize fight in your dreams, denotes your affairs will give
you trouble in controlling them.

_Prize Fighter_.

For a young woman to see a prize fighter, foretells she will have pleasure
in fast society, and will give her friends much concern about her reputation.

_Procession_.

To dream of a procession, denotes that alarming fears will
possess you relative to the fulfilment of expectations.
If it be a funeral procession, sorrow is fast approaching,
and will throw a shadow around pleasures.

To see or participate in a torch-light procession, denotes that you
will engage in gaieties which will detract from your real merit.

_Profanity_.

To dream of profanity, denotes that you will cultivate those traits
which render you coarse and unfeeling toward your fellow man.

To dream that others use profanity, is a sign that you will be injured
in some way, and probably insulted also.

_Profits_.[175]

To dream of profits, brings success in your immediate future.


[175] See Gain.

_Promenade_.

To dream of promenading, foretells that you will engage in energetic
and profitable pursuits.

To see others promenading, signifies that you will have rivals
in your pursuits.

_Property_.[176]

To dream that you own vast property, denotes that you will be successful
in affairs, and gain friendships.


[176] See Wealth.

_Prostitute_.[177]

To dream that you are in the company of a prostitute, denotes that you
will incur the righteous scorn of friends for some ill-mannered conduct.

For a young woman to dream of a prostitute, foretells that
she will deceive her lover as to her purity or candor.
This dream to a married woman brings suspicion of her husband
and consequent quarrels.


[177] See Harlot.

_Publican_.

To dream of a publican, denotes that you will have your sympathies aroused
by some one in a desperate condition, and you will diminish your own gain
for his advancement.  To a young woman, this dream brings a worthy lover;
but because of his homeliness she will trample on his feelings unnecessarily.

_Publisher_.

To dream of a publisher, foretells long journeys and aspirations
to the literary craft.

If a woman dreams that her husband is a publisher, she will be jealous
of more than one woman of his acquaintance, and spicy scenes will ensue.

For a publisher to reject your manuscript, denotes that you will
suffer disappointment at the miscarriage of cherished designs.
If he accepts it, you will rejoice in the full fruition of your hopes.
If he loses it, you will suffer evil at the hands of strangers.

_Puddings_.

To dream of puddings, denotes small returns from large investments,
if you only see it.

To eat it, is proof that your affairs will be disappointing.

For a young woman to cook, or otherwise prepare a pudding,
denotes that her lover will be sensual and worldly minded,
and if she marries him, she will see her love and fortune vanish.

_Puddle_.

To find yourself stepping into puddles of clear water in a dream,
denotes a vexation, but some redeeming good in the future.
If the water be muddy, unpleasantness will go a few rounds with you.

To wet your feet by stepping into puddles, foretells that your pleasure
will work you harm afterwards.

_Pulpit_.

To dream of a pulpit, denotes sorrow and vexation.

To dream that you are in a pulpit, foretells sickness, and unsatisfactory
results in business or trades of any character.

_Pulse_.

To dream of your pulse, is warning to look after your affairs and health
with close care, as both are taking on debilitating conditions.

To dream of feeling the pulse of another, signifies that you are committing
depredations in Pleasure's domain.

_Pump_.

To see a pump in a dream, denotes that energy and faithfulness
to business will produce desired riches, good health also is
usually betokened by this dream.

To see a broken pump, signifies that the means of advancing in life
will be absorbed by family cares.  To the married and the unmarried,
it intimates blasted energies.

If you work a pump, your life will be filled with pleasure
and profitable undertakings.

_Punch_.

To dream of drinking the concoction called punch, denotes that you
will prefer selfish pleasures to honorable distinction and morality.

To dream that you are punching any person with a club or fist,
denotes quarrels and recriminations.

_Pup_.[178]

To dream of pups, denotes that you will entertain the innocent and hapless,
and thereby enjoy pleasure.  The dream also shows that friendships
will grow stronger, and fortune will increase if the pups are healthful
and well formed, and _vice versa_ if they are lean and filthy.


[178] See Dogs and Hound Pups.

_Purchases_.

To dream of purchases usually augurs profit and advancement with pleasure.

_Purse_.[179]

To dream of your purse being filled with diamonds and new bills,
denotes for you associations where ``Good Cheer'' is the watchword,
and harmony and tender loves will make earth a beautiful place.


[179] See Pocket-book.

_Putty_.

To dream of working in putty, denotes that hazardous chances
will be taken with fortune.

If you put in a window-pane with putty, you will seek fortune
with poor results.

_Pyramid_.

To dream of pyramids, denotes that many changes will come to you.

If you scale them, you will journey along before you find the gratification
of desires.  For the young woman, it prognosticates a husband who is in
no sense congenial.

To dream that you are studying the mystery of the ancient pyramids,
denotes that you will develop a love for the mysteries of nature,
and you will become learned and polished.



Q.

``_And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth,
and the top of it reached to heaven; and behold, the angels
of God ascending and descending on it_.''--Gen. xxviii., 12.

_Quack Doctor_.

To see a quack doctor in your dreams, denotes you will be alarmed
over some illness and its improper treatment.

_Quack Medicine_.

To dream you take quack medicine, shows that you are growing morbid under
some trouble, and should overcome it by industrious application to duty.
To read the advertisement of it, foretells unhappy companions will wrong
and distress you.

_Quadrille_.[180]

To dream of dancing a quadrille, foretells that some pleasant
engagement will occupy your time.


[180] See Dancing.

_Quagmire_.

To dream of being in a quagmire, implies your inability to meet obligations.
To see others thus situated, denotes that the failures of others will be felt
by you.  Illness is sometimes indicated by this dream.

_Quail_.

To see quails in your dream, is a very favorable omen, if they are alive;
if dead, you will undergo serious ill luck.

To shoot quail, foretells that ill feelings will be shown by you
to your best friends.

To eat them, signifies extravagance in your personal living.

_Quaker_.

To dream of a Quaker, denotes that you will have faithful friends
and fair business.  If you are one, you will deport yourself
honorably toward an enemy.

For a young woman to attend a Quaker meeting, portends that she
will by her modest manners win a faithful husband who will provide
well for her household.

_Quarantine_.

To dream of being in quarantine, denotes that you will be placed
in a disagreeable position by the malicious intriguing of enemies.

_Quarrel_.

Quarrels in dreams, portends unhappiness, and fierce altercations.
To a young woman, it is the signal of fatal unpleasantries, and to
a married woman it brings separation or continuous disagreements.

To hear others quarreling, denotes unsatisfactory business
and disappointing trade.

_Quarry_.

To dream of being in a quarry and seeing the workmen busy,
denotes that you will advance by hard labor.

An idle quarry, signifies failure, disappointment, and often death.

_Quartette_.

To dream of a quartette, and you are playing or singing,
denotes favorable affairs, jolly companions, and good times.

To see or hear a quartette, foretells that you will aspire
to something beyond you.

_Quay_.

To dream of a quay, denotes that you will contemplate making a long
tour in the near future.

To see vessels while standing on the quay, denotes the fruition
of wishes and designs.

_Queen_.[181]

To dream of a queen, foretells succesful{sic} ventures.
If she looks old or haggard, there will be disappointments
connected with your pleasures.


[181] See Empress.

_Question_.

To question the merits of a thing in your dreams, denotes that
you will suspect some one whom you love of unfaithfulness,
and you will fear for your speculations.

To ask a question, foretells that you will earnestly strive for truth
and be successful.

If you are questioned, you will be unfairly dealt with.

_Quicksand_.

To find yourself in quicksand while dreaming, you will meet
with loss and deceit.

If you are unable to overcome it, you will be involved
in overwhelming misfortunes.

For a young woman to be rescued by her lover from quicksand,
she will possess a worthy and faithful husband, who will still
remain her lover.

_Quills_.

To dream of quills, denotes to the literary inclined a season of success.

To dream of them as ornaments, signifies a rushing trade,
and some remuneration.

For a young woman to be putting a quill on her hat, denotes that she will
attempt many conquests, and her success will depend upon her charms.

_Quilts_.

To dream of quilts, foretells pleasant and comfortable circumstances.
For a young woman, this dream foretells that her practical and wise
business-like ways will advance her into the favorable esteem of a man
who will seek her for a wife.

If the quilts are clean, but having holes in them, she will win
a husband who appreciates her worth, but he will not be the one
most desired by her for a companion.  If the quilts are soiled,
she will bear evidence of carelessness in her dress and manners,
and thus fail to secure a very upright husband.

_Quinine_.

To dream of quinine, denotes you will soon be possessed of
great happiness, though your prospects for much wealth may be meager.
To take some, foretells improvement in health and energy.
You will also make new friends, who will lend you commercial aid.

_Quinsy_.

To dream of being afflicted with this disease,
denotes discouraging employments.

To see others with it, sickness will cause you much anxiety.

_Quoits_.  To play at quoits in dreams, foretells low engagements and loss
of good employment.  To lose, portends of distressing conditions.



R.

``_And the angel of God spake unto me in a dream, saying `Jacob:' And I said,
`Here I am_.'  ''--Gen. xxxi, 11.

_Rabbit_.[182]

To dream of rabbits, foretells favorable turns in conditions,
and you will be more pleased with your gains than formerly.

To see white rabbits, denotes faithfulness in love, to the married or single.

To see rabbits frolicing about, denotes that children will contribute
to your joys.


[182] See Hare.

_Raccoon_.

To dream of a raccoon, denotes you are being deceived by the friendly
appearance of enemies.

_Race_.

To dream that you are in a race, foretells that others will aspire
to the things you are working to possess, but if you win in the race,
you will overcome your competitors.

_Rack_.

To dream of a rack, denotes the uncertainty of the outcome of some engagement
which gives you much anxious thought.

_Racket_.

To dream of a racket, denotes that you will be foiled in some
anticipated pleasure.  For a young woman, this dream is ominous
of disappointment in not being able to participate in some
amusement that has engaged her attention.

_Radish_.

To dream of seeing a bed of radishes growing, is an omen of good luck.
Your friends will be unusually kind, and your business will prosper.

If you eat them, you will suffer slightly through the thoughtlessness
of some one near to you.

To see radishes, or plant them, denotes that your anticipations
will be happily realized.

_Raffle_.

If you dream of raffling any article, you will fall a victim to speculation.

If you are at a church raffle, you will soon find that
disappointment is clouding your future.  For a young woman,
this dream means empty expectations.

_Raft_.

To dream of a raft, denotes that you will go into new locations
to engage in enterprises, which will prove successful.

To dream of floating on a raft, denotes uncertain journeys.
If you reach your destination, you will surely come into good fortune.

If a raft breaks, or any such mishap befalls it, yourself or some friend
will suffer from an accident, or sickness will bear unfortunate results.

_Rage_.

To be in a rage and scolding and tearing up things generally, while dreaming,
signifies quarrels, and injury to your friends.

To see others in a rage, is a sign of unfavorable conditions for business,
and unhappiness in social life.

For a young woman to see her lover in a rage, denotes that there
will be some discordant note in their love, and misunderstandings
will naturally occur.

_Railing_.

To dream of seeing railings, denotes that some person is trying
to obstruct your pathway in love or business.

To dream of holding on to a railing, foretells that some desperate chance will
be taken by you to obtain some object upon which you have set your heart.
It may be of love, or of a more material form.

_Railroad_.

If you dream of a railroad, you will find that your business will need
close attention, as enemies are trying to usurp you.

For a young woman to dream of railroads, she will make a journey
to visit friends, and will enjoy some distinction.

To see an obstruction on these roads, indicates foul play in your affairs.

To walk the cross ties of a railroad, signifies a time of worry
and laborious work.

To walk the rails, you may expect to obtain much happiness from your skilful
manipulation of affairs.

To see a road inundated with clear water, foretells that pleasure will wipe
out misfortune for a time, but it will rise, phoenix like, again.

_Rain_.

To be out in a clear shower of rain, denotes that pleasure will be enjoyed
with the zest of youth, and prosperity will come to you.

If the rain descends from murky clouds, you will feel alarmed
over the graveness of your undertakings.

To see and hear rain approaching, and you escape being wet, you will succeed
in your plans, and your designs will mature rapidly.

To be sitting in the house and see through the window a downpour of rain,
denotes that you will possess fortune, and passionate love will be requited.

To hear the patter of rain on the roof, denotes a realization of domestic
bliss and joy.  Fortune will come in a small way.

To dream that your house is leaking during a rain, if the water is clear,
foretells that illicit pleasure will come to you rather unexpectedly;
but if filthy or muddy, you may expect the reverse, and also exposure.

To find yourself regretting some duty unperformed while listening to the rain,
denotes that you will seek pleasure at the expense of another's sense
of propriety and justice.

To see it rain on others, foretells that you will exclude friends
from your confidence.

For a young woman to dream of getting her clothes wet and soiled while
out in a rain, denotes that she will entertain some person indiscreetly,
and will suffer the suspicions of friends for the unwise yielding
to foolish enjoyments.

To see it raining on farm stock, foretells disappointment in business,
and unpleasantness in social circles.

Stormy rains are always unfortunate.

_Rainbow_.

To see a rainbow in a dream, is prognostic of unusual happenings.
Affairs will assume a more promising countenance, and crops will give
promise of a plentiful yield.

For lovers to see the rainbow, is an omen of much happiness
from their union.

To see the rainbow hanging low over green trees, signifies unconditional
success in any undertaking.

_Raisins_.

To dream of eating raisins, implies that discouragements will darken
your hopes when they seem about to be realized.

_Rake_.

To dream of using a rake, portends that some work which you have left
to others will never be accomplished unless you superintend it yourself.

To see a broken rake, denotes that sickness, or some accident
will bring failure to your plans.

To see others raking, foretells that you will rejoice in the fortunate
condition of others.

_Ram_.[183]

To dream that a ram pursues you, foretells that some misfortune threatens you.

To see one quietly grazing denotes that you will have powerful friends,
who will use their best efforts for your good.


[183] See Sheep and Lamb.

_Ramble_.

To dream that you are rambling through the country, denotes that you
will be oppressed with sadness, and the separation from friends,
but your worldly surroundings will be all that one could desire.
For a young woman, this dream promises a comfortable home,
but early bereavement.

_Ramrod_.

To dream of a ramrod, denotes unfortunate adventures.
You will have cause for grief.  For a young woman to see one bent
or broken, foretells that a dear friend or lover will fail her.

_Ransom_.

To dream that a ransom is made for you, you will find
that you are deceived and worked for money on all sides.
For a young woman, this is prognostic of evil, unless some one
pays the ransom and relieves her.

_Rape_.

To dream that rape has been committed among your acquaintances,
denotes that you will be shocked at the distress of some
of your friends.

For a young woman to dream that she has been the victim of rape,
foretells that she will have troubles, which will wound her pride,
and her lover will be estranged.

_Rapids_.

To imagine that you are being carried over rapids in a dream,
denotes that you will suffer appalling loss from the neglect
of duty and the courting of seductive pleasures.

_Raspberry_.

To see raspberries in a dream, foretells you are in danger of entanglements
which will prove interesting before you escape from them.

For a woman to eat them, means distress over circumstantial evidence
in some occurrence causing gossip.

_Rat_.[184]

To dream of rats, denotes that you will be deceived, and injured
by your neighbors.  Quarrels with your companions is also foreboded.

To catch rats, means you will scorn the baseness of others,
and worthily outstrip your enemies.

To kill one, denotes your victory in any contest.


[184] See Mice.

_Rat-trap_.[185]

To dream of falling into a rat-trap, denotes that you will be victimized
and robbed of some valuable object.

To see an empty one, foretells the absence of slander or competition.

A broken one, denotes that you will be rid of unpleasant associations.

To set one, you will be made aware of the designs of enemies,
but the warning will enable you to outwit them.


[185] See Mouse-trap.

_Rattan Cane_.

To dream of a rattan cane, foretells that you will depend largely
upon the judgment of others, and you should cultivate independence
in planning and executing your own affairs.

_Rattle_.

To dream of seeing a baby play with its rattle, omens peaceful contentment
in the home, and enterprises will be honorable and full of gain.
To a young woman, it augurs an early marriage and tender cares of her own.

To give a baby a rattle, denotes unfortunate investments.

_Raven_.[186]

To dream of a raven, denotes reverse in fortune and
inharmonious surroundings.  For a young woman, it is implied
that her lover will betray her.


[186] See Crow.

_Razor_.

To dream of a razor, portends disagreements and contentions over troubles.

To cut yourself with one, denotes that you will be unlucky in some deal
which you are about to make.

Fighting with a razor, foretells disappointing business,
and that some one will keep you harassed almost beyond endurance.

A broken or rusty one, brings unavoidable distress.

_Reading_.

To be engaged in reading in your dreams, denotes that you will excel
in some work, which appears difficult.

To see others reading, denotes that your friends will be kind,
and are well disposed.

To give a reading, or to discuss reading, you will cultivate
your literary ability.

Indistinct, or incoherent reading, implies worries and disappointments.

_Reapers_.[187]

To dream of seeing reapers busy at work at their task,
denotes prosperity and contentment.  If they appear to be going
through dried stubble, there will be a lack of good crops,
and business will consequently fall off.

To see idle ones, denotes that some discouraging event will come
in the midst of prosperity.

To see a broken reaping machine, signifies loss of employment,
or disappointment in trades.


[187] See Mowing.

_Reception_.[188]

To dream of attending a reception, denotes that you will
have pleasant engagements.  Confusion at a reception will
work you disquietude.


[188] See Entertainment.

_Refrigerator_.

To see a refrigerator in your dreams, portends that your selfishness will
offend and injure some one who endeavors to gain an honest livelihood.

To put ice in one, brings the dreamer into disfavor.

_Register_.

To dream that some one registers your name at a hotel for you,
denotes you will undertake some work which will be finished by others.

If you register under an assumed name, you will engage in some guilty
enterprise which will give you much uneasiness of mind.

_Reindeer_.

To dream of a reindeer, signifies faithful discharge of duties,
and remaining staunch to friends in their adversity.

To drive them, foretells that you will have hours of bitter anguish,
but friends will attend you.

_Religion_.

If you dream of discussing religion and feel religiously inclined,
you will find much to mar the calmness of your life, and business
will turn a disagreeable front to you.

If a young woman imagines that she is over religious, she will disgust
her lover with her efforts to act ingenuous innocence and goodness.

If she is irreligious and not a transgressor, it foretells that she will have
that independent frankness and kind consideration for others, which wins
for women profound respect, and love from the opposite sex as well as her own;
but if she is a transgressor in the eyes of religion, she will find that there
are moral laws, which, if disregarded, will place her outside the pale
of honest recognition.  She should look well after her conduct.  If she
weeps over religion, she will be disappointed in the desires of her heart.
If she is defiant, but innocent of offence, she will shoulder burdens bravely,
and stand firm against deceitful admonitions.

If you are self-reproached in the midst of a religious excitement,
you will find that you will be almost induced to give up your own
personality to please some one whom you hold in reverent esteem.

To see religion declining in power, denotes that your life
will be more in harmony with creation than formerly.
Your prejudices will not be so aggressive.

To dream that a minister in a social way tells you that he has given
up his work, foretells that you will be the recipient of unexpected
tidings of a favorable nature, but if in a professional and warning way,
it foretells that you will be overtaken in your deceitful intriguing,
or other disappointments will follow.

(These dreams are sometimes fulfilled literally in actual life.
When this is so, they may have no symbolical meaning.
Religion is thrown around men to protect them from vice, so when
they propose secretly in their minds to ignore its teachings,
they are likely to see a minister or some place of church worship
in a dream as a warning against their contemplated action.
If they live pure and correct lives as indicated by the church,
they will see little of the solemnity of the church or preachers.)

_Rent_.

To dream that you rent a house, is a sign that you will enter
into new contracts, which will prove profitable.

To fail to rent out property, denotes that there will be much
inactivity in business.

To pay rent, signifies that your financial interest will be satisfactory.

If you can't pay your rent, it is unlucky for you, as you will see a falling
off in trade, and social pleasures will be of little benefit.

_Reprieve_.

To be under sentence in a dream and receive a reprieve, foretells that you
will overcome some difficulty which is causing you anxiety.

For a young woman to dream that her lover has been reprieved,
denotes that she will soon hear of some good luck befalling him,
which will be of vital interest to her.

_Reptile_.

If a reptile attacks you in a dream, there will be trouble
of a serious nature ahead for you.  If you succeed in killing it,
you will finally overcome obstacles.

To see a dead reptile come to life, denotes that disputes
and disagreements, which were thought to be settled, will be
renewed and pushed with bitter animosity.

To handle them without harm to yourself, foretells that you
will be oppressed by the ill humor and bitterness of friends,
but you will succeed in restoring pleasant relations.

For a young woman to see various kinds of reptiles, she will have many
conflicting troubles.  Her lover will develop fancies for others.
If she is bitten by any of them, she will be superseded by a rival.

_Rescue_.

To dream of being rescued from any danger, denotes that you will be threatened
with misfortune, and will escape with a slight loss.

To rescue others, foretells that you will be esteemed for your good deeds.

_Resign_.

To dream that you resign any position, signifies that you will unfortunately
embark in new enterprises.

To hear of others resigning, denotes that you will
have unpleaasant{sic} tidings.

_Resurrection_.

To dream that you are resurrected from the dead, you will have
some great vexation, but will eventually gain your desires.
To see others resurrected, denotes unfortunate troubles will
be lightened by the thoughtfulness of friends

_Resuscitate_.

To dream that you are being resuscitated, denotes that you will
have heavy losses, but will eventually regain more than you lose,
and happiness will attend you.

To resuscitate another, you will form new friendships, which will give
you prominence and pleasure.

_Revelation_.

To dream of a revelation, if it be of a pleasant nature,
you may expect a bright outlook, either in business or love;
but if the revelation be gloomy you will have many discouraging
features to overcome.

_Revenge_.

To dream of taking revenge, is a sign of a weak and uncharitable nature,
which if not properly governed, will bring you troubles and loss of friends.

If others revenge themselves on you, there will be much to fear from enemies.

_Revival_.[189]

To dream you attend a religious revival, foretells family disturbances
and unprofitable engagements.

If you take a part in it, you will incur the displeasure of friends
by your contrary ways.


[189] See Religion.

_Revolver_.[190]

For a young woman to dream that she sees her sweetheart with a revolver,
denotes that she will have a serious disagreement with some friend,
and probably separation from her lover.


[190] See Pistol, Firearms, etc.

_Rheumatism_.

To feel rheumatism attacking you in a dream, foretells unexpected
delay in the accomplishment of plans.

To see others so afflicted brings disappointments.

_Rhinestones_.

To dream of rhinestones, denotes pleasures and favors of short duration.
For a young woman to dream that a rhinestone proves to be a diamond,
foretells she will be surprised to find that some insignificant act
on her part will result in good fortune.

_Rhinoceros_.

To dream that you see a rhinoceros, foretells you will have a great
loss threatening you, and that you will have secret troubles.
To kill one, shows that you will bravely overcome obstacles.

_Rhubarb_.

To dream of rhubarb growing, denotes that pleasant entertainments
will occupy your time for a while.

To cook it, foretells spirited arguments in which you will lose a friend.

To eat it, denotes dissatisfaction with present employment.

_Rib_.

To dream of seeing ribs, denotes poverty and misery.

_Ribbon_.

Seeing ribbons floating from the costume of any person in your dreams,
indicates you will have gay and pleasant companions, and practical cares
will not trouble you greatly.

For a young woman to dream of decorating herself with ribbons,
she will soon have a desirable offer of marriage, but frivolity may
cause her to make a mistake.  If she sees other girls wearing ribbons,
she will encounter rivalry in her endeavors to secure a husband.
If she buys them, she will have a pleasant and easy place in life.
If she feels angry or displeased about them, she will find that
some other woman is dividing her honors and pleasures with her
in her social realm.

_Rice_.

Rice is good to see in dreams, as it foretells success and warm friendships.
Prosperity to all trades is promised, and the farmer will be blessed with
a bounteous harvest.

To eat it, signifies happiness and domestic comfort.

To see it mixed with dirt or otherwise impure, denotes sickness
and separation from friends.

For a young woman to dream of cooking it, shows she will soon assume
new duties, which will make her happier, and she will enjoy wealth.

_Riches_.[191]

To dream that you are possessed of riches, denotes that you will rise to high
places by your constant exertion and attention to your affairs.


[191] See Wealth.

_Riddles_.

To dream that you are trying to solve riddles, denotes you will engage
in some enterprise which will try your patience and employ your money.

The import of riddles is confusion and dissatisfaction.

_Ride_.

To dream of riding is unlucky for business or pleasure.
Sickness often follows this dream.

If you ride slowly, you will have unsatisfactory results in your undertakings.

Swift riding sometimes means prosperity under hazardous conditions.

_Riding School_.

To attend a riding school, foretells some friend will act falsely by you,
but you will throw off the vexing influence occasioned by it.

_Ring_.

To dream of wearing rings, denotes new enterprises in which you
will be successful.

A broken ring, foretells quarrels and unhappiness in the married state,
and separation to lovers.

For a young woman to receive a ring, denotes that worries
over her lover's conduct will cease, as he will devote himself
to her pleasures and future interest.

To see others with rings, denotes increasing prosperity and many new friends.

_Ringworms_.

To dream of having ringworms appear on you, you will have a slight illness,
and some exasperating difficulty in the near future.

To see them on others, beggars and appeals for charity will beset you.

_Riot_.

To dream of riots, foretells disappointing affairs.

To see a friend killed in a riot, you will have bad luck
in all undertakings, and the death, or some serious illness,
of some person will cause you distress.

_Rising_.

To dream of rising to high positions, denotes that study and advancement
will bring you desired wealth.

If you find yourself rising high into the air, you will come into unexpected
riches and pleasures, but you are warned to be careful of your engagements,
or you may incur displeasing prominence.

_Rival_.

To dream you have a rival, is a sign that you will be slow in asserting
your rights, and will lose favor with people of prominence.

For a young woman, this dream is a warning to cherish the love
she already holds, as she might unfortunately make a mistake
in seeking other bonds.

If you find that a rival has outwitted you, it signifies that you
will be negligent in your business, and that you love personal ease
to your detriment.

If you imagine that you are the successful rival, it is good for
your advancement, and you will find congeniality in your choice
of a companion.

_River_.

If you see a clear, smooth, flowing river in your dream,
you will soon succeed to the enjoyment of delightful pleasures,
and prosperity will bear flattering promises.

If the waters are muddy or tumultuous, there will be disagreeable
and jealous contentions in your life.

If you are water-bound by the overflowing of a river, there will
be temporary embarrassments in your business, or you will suffer
uneasiness lest some private escapade will reach public notice
and cause your reputation harsh criticisms.

If while sailing upon a clear river you see corpses in the bottom,
you will find that trouble and gloom will follow swiftly upon present
pleasures and fortune.

To see empty rivers, denotes sickness and unusual ill-luck.


_Road_.

Traveling over a rough, unknown road in a dream, signifies new undertakings,
which will bring little else than grief and loss of time.

If the road is bordered with trees and flowers, there will be some
pleasant and unexpected fortune for you.  If friends accompany you,
you will be successful in building an ideal home, with happy children
and faithful wife, or husband.

To lose the road, foretells that you will make a mistake in deciding
some question of trade, and suffer loss in consequence.

_Roast_.

To see or eat roast in a dream, is an omen of domestic infelicity
and secret treachery.

_Rocket_.

To see a rocket ascending in your dream, foretells sudden and
unexpected elevation, successful wooing, and faithful keeping
of the marriage vows.

To see them falling, unhappy unions may be expected.

_Rocking-chair_.

Rocking-chairs seen in dreams, bring friendly intercourse and contentment
with any environment.

To see a mother, wife, or sweetheart in a rocking chair,
is ominous of the sweetest joys that earth affords.

To see vacant rocking-chairs, forebodes bereavement or estrangement.
The dreamer will surely merit misfortune in some form.

_Rocks_.[192]

To dream of rocks, denotes that you will meet reverses,
and that there will be discord and general unhappiness.

To climb a steep rock, foretells immediate struggles
and disappointing surroundings.


[192] See Stones.

_Rogue_.

To see or think yourself a rogue, foretells you are about to commit
some indiscretion which will give your friends uneasiness of mind.
You are likely to suffer from a passing malady.

For a woman to think her husband or lover is a rogue, foretells she
will be painfully distressed over neglect shown her by a friend.

_Rogue's Gallery_.

To dream that you are in a rogue's gallery, foretells you will
be associated with people who will fail to appreciate you.
To see your own picture, you will be overawed by a tormenting enemy.

_Roman Candle_.[193]

To see Roman candles while dreaming, is a sign of speedy attainment
of coveted pleasures and positions.

To imagine that you have a loaded candle and find it empty,
denotes that you will be disappointed with the possession
of some object which you have long striven to obtain.


[193] See Rocket.

_Roof_.

To find yourself on a roof in a dream, denotes unbounded success.
To become frightened and think you are falling, signifies that,
while you may advance, you will have no firm hold on your position.

To see a roof falling in, you will be threatened with a sudden calamity.

To repair, or build a roof, you will rapidly increase your fortune.

To sleep on one, proclaims your security against enemies
and false companions.  Your health will be robust.

_Roof Corner_.

To see a person dressed in mourning sitting on a roof corner,
foretells there will be unexpected and dismal failures
in your business.

Affairs will appear unfavorable in love.

_Rooks_.

To dream of rooks, denotes that while your friends are true,
they will not afford you the pleasure and contentment for which
you long, as your thoughts and tastes will outstrip their humble
conception of life.

A dead rook, denotes sickness or death in your immediate future.

_Rooster_.[194]

To dream of a rooster, foretells that you will be very successful
and rise to prominence, but you will allow yourself to become
conceited over your fortunate rise.

To see roosters fighting, foretells altercations and rivals.


[194] See Chickens.

_Roots_.

To dream of seeing roots of plants or trees, denotes misfortune,
as both business and health will go into decline.

To use them as medicine, warns you of approaching illness or sorrow.

_Ropes_.

Ropes in dreams, signify perplexities and complications in affairs,
and uncertain love making.

If you climb one, you will overcome enemies who are working to injure you.

To decend{sic} a rope, brings disappointment to your most sanguine moments.

If you are tied with them, you are likely to yield to love contrary
to your judgment.

To break them, signifies your ability to overcome enmity and competition.

To tie ropes, or horses, denotes that you will have power to control others
as you may wish.

To walk a rope, signifies that you will engage in some
hazardous speculation, but will surprisingly succeed.
To see others walking a rope, you will benefit by the fortunate
ventures of others.

To jump a rope, foretells that you will startle your associates
with a thrilling escapade bordering upon the sensational.

To jump rope with children, shows that you are selfish and overbearing;
failing to see that children owe very little duty to inhuman parents.
To catch a rope with the foot, denotes that under cheerful conditions
you will be benevolent and tender in your administrations.

To dream that you let a rope down from an upper window to people below,
thinking the proprietors would be adverse to receiving them into the hotel,
denotes that you will engage in some affair which will not look exactly
proper to your friends, but the same will afford you pleasure and interest.
For a young woman, this dream is indicative of pleasures which do not bear
the stamp of propriety.

_Rosebush_.

To see a rosebush in foliage but no blossoms, denotes prosperous
circumstances are enclosing you.  To see a dead rosebush,
foretells misfortune and sickness for you or relatives.

_Rosemary_.

Rosemary, if seen in dreams, denotes that sadness and indifference will cause
unhappiness in homes where there is every appearance of prosperity.

_Roses_.

To dream of seeing roses blooming and fragrant, denotes that some
joyful occasion is nearing, and you will possess the faithful love
of your sweetheart.

For a young woman to dream of gathering roses, shows she will soon
have an offer of marriage, which will be much to her liking.

Withered roses, signify the absence of loved ones.

White roses, if seen without sunshine or dew, denotes serious
if not fatal illness.

To inhale their fragrance, brings unalloyed pleasure.

For a young woman to dream of banks of roses, and that she is gathering
and tying them into bouquets, signifies that she will be made very happy
by the offering of some person whom she regards very highly.

_Rosette_.

To wear or see rosettes on others while in dreams, is significant
of frivolous waste of time; though you will experience the thrills
of pleasure, they will bring disappointments.

_Rouge_.

To dream of using rouge, denotes that you will practice deceit
to obtain your wishes.

To see others with it on their faces, warns you that you are being artfully
used to further the designs of some deceitful persons.

If you see it on your hands, or clothing, you will be detected
in some scheme.

If it comes off of your face, you will be humiliated before some rival,
and lose your lover by assuming unnatural manners.

_Roundabout_.

To dream of seeing a roundabout, denotes that you will struggle
unsuccessfully to advance in fortune or love.

_Rowboat_.

To dream that you are in a rowboat with others, denotes that you will
derive much pleasure from the companionship of gay and worldly persons.
If the boat is capsized, you will suffer financial losses by engaging
in seductive enterprises.

If you find yourself defeated in a rowing race,
you will lose favors to your rivals with your sweetheart.
If you are the victor, you will easily obtain supremacy with women.
Your affairs will move agreeably.

_Rubber_.

To dream of being clothed in rubber garments, is a sign that you
will have honors conferred upon you because of your steady
and unchanging stand of purity and morality.  If the garments
are ragged or torn, you should be cautious in your conduct,
as scandal is ready to attack your reputation.

To dream of using ``rubber'' as a slang term, foretells that you
will be easy to please in your choice of pleasure and companions.

If you find that your limbs will stretch like rubber, it is a sign
that illness is threatening you, and you are likely to use deceit
in your wooing and business.

To dream of rubber goods, denotes that your affairs will be conducted
on a secret basis, and your friends will fail to understand your conduct
in many instances.

_Rubbish_.

To dream of rubbish, denotes that you will badly manage your affairs.

_Ruby_.

To dream of a ruby, foretells you will be lucky in speculations of business
or love.  For a woman to lose one, is a sign of approaching indifference
of her lover.

_Rudder_.

To dream of a rudder, you will soom{sic} make a pleasant journey
to foreign lands, and new friendships will be formed.

A broken rudder, augurs disappointment and sickness.

_Ruins_.

To dream of ruins, signifies broken engagements to lovers,
distressing conditions in business, destruction to crops,
and failing health.

To dream of ancient ruins, foretells that you will travel extensively,
but there will be a note of sadness mixed with the pleasure in the realization
of a long-cherished hope.  You will feel the absence of some friend.

_Rum_.[195]

To dream of drinking rum, foretells that you will have wealth,
but will lack moral refinement, as you will lean to gross pleasures.


[195] See other intoxicating drinks.

_Running_.

To dream of running in company with others, is a sign that you
will participate in some festivity, and you will find that your
affairs are growing towards fortune.  If you stumble or fall,
you will lose property and reputation.

Running alone, indicates that you will outstrip your friends in the race
for wealth, and you will occupy a higher place in social life.

If you run from danger, you will be threatened with losses,
and you will despair of adjusting matters agreeably.
To see others thus running, you will be oppressed by the threatened
downfall of friends.

To see stock running, warns you to be careful in making new trades
or undertaking new tasks.

_Rupture_.

To dream that you are ruptured, denotes you will have physical disorders
or disagreeable contentions.  If it be others you see in this condition,
you will be in danger of irreconcilable quarrels.

_Rust_.

To dream of rust on articles, old pieces of tin, or iron, is significant
of depression of your surroundings.  Sickness, decline in fortune and false
friends are filling your sphere.

_Rye_.

To see rye, is a dream of good, as prosperity envelopes your future
in brightest promises.

To see coffee made of rye, denotes that your pleasures will be
tempered with sound judgment, and your affairs will be managed
without disagreeable friction.

To see stock entering rye fields, denotes that you will be prosperous.

_Rye Bread_.

To see or eat rye bread in your dreams, foretells you will have a cheerful
and well-appointed home.



S.

``_And it came to pass at the end of the two full years,
that Pharaoh dreamed; and behold, he stood by the river_.''--
Gen. Xli., 1.

_Saddle_.

To dream of saddles, foretells news of a pleasant nature,
also unannounced visitors.  You are also, probably, to take
a trip which will prove advantageous.

_Safe_.

To dream of seeing a safe, denotes security from discouraging
affairs of business and love.

To be trying to unlock a safe, you will be worried over the failure
of your plans not reaching quick maturity.

To find a safe empty, denotes trouble.

_Saffron_.

Saffron seen in a dream warns you that you are entertaining false hopes,
as bitter enemies are interfering secretly with your plans for the future.

To drink a tea made from saffron, foretells that you will have quarrels
and alienations in your family.

_Sage_.

To dream of sage, foretells thrift and economy will be practised by your
servants or family.  For a woman to think she has too much in her viands,
omens she will regret useless extravagance in love as well as fortune.

_Sailing_.[196]

To dream of sailing on calm waters, foretells easy access to blissful joys,
and immunity from poverty and whatever brings misery.

To sail on a small vessel, denotes that your desires will not excel
your power of possessing them.


[196] See Ocean and Sea.

_Sailor_.

To dream of sailors, portends long and exciting journeys.

For a young woman to dream of sailors, is ominous of a separation from her
lover through a frivolous flirtation.  If she dreams that she is a sailor,
she will indulge in some unmaidenly escapade, and be in danger of losing
a faithful lover.

_Salad_.

To dream of eating salad, foretells sickness and disagreeable
people around you.

For a young woman to dream of making it, is a sign that her lover
will be changeable and quarrelsome.

_Salmon_.

Dreaming of salmon, denotes that much good luck and pleasant duties
will employ your time.

For a young woman to eat it, foretells that she will marry a cheerful man,
with means to keep her comfortable.

_Salt_.

Salt is an omen of discordant surroundings when seen in dreams.
You will usually find after dreaming of salt that everything goes awry,
and quarrels and dissatisfaction show themselves in the family circle.

To salt meat, portends that debts and mortgages will harass you.

For a young woman to eat salt, she will be deserted by her lover for a more
beautiful and attractive girl, thus causing her deep chagrin.

_Saltpeter_.

To dream of saltpeter, denotes change in your living will add
loss to some unconquerable grief.

_Salve_.

To dream of salve, denotes you will prosper under adverse circumstances
and convert enemies into friends.

_Samples_.

To dream of receiving merchandise samples, denotes improvement
in your business.  For a traveling man to lose his samples,
implies he will find himself embarrassed in business affairs,
or in trouble through love engagements.  For a woman to dream
that she is examining samples sent her, denotes she will have
chances to vary her amusements.

_Sand_.

To dream of sand, is indicative of famine and losses.

_Sanskrit_.

To dream of Sanskrit, denotes that you will estrange yourself from friends
in order to investigate hidden subjects, taking up those occupying the minds
of cultured and progressive thinkers.

_Sapphire_.

To dream of sapphire, is ominous of fortunate gain, and to woman,
a wise selection in a lover.

_Sardines_.

To eat sardines in a dream, foretells that distressing events
will come unexpectedly upon you.

For a young woman to dream of putting them on the table,
denotes that she will be worried with the attentions of a person
who is distasteful to her.

_Sardonyx_.

To dream of sardonyx, signifies gloomy surroundings will
be cleared away by your energetic overthrow of poverty.
For a woman, this dream denotes an increase in her possessions,
unless she loses or throws them away, then it might imply
a disregard of opportunities to improve her condition.

_Sash_.

To dream of wearing a sash, foretells that you will seek to retain
the affections of a flirtatious person.

For a young woman to buy one, she will be faithful to her lover,
and win esteem by her frank, womanly ways.

_Satan_.[197]

To dream of Satan, foretells that you will have some dangerous adventures,
and you will be forced to use strategy to keep up honorable appearances.

To dream that you kill him, foretells that you will desert wicked
or immoral companions to live upon a higher plane.

If he comes to you under the guise of literature, it should be heeded
as a warning against promiscuous friendships, and especially flatterers.

If he comes in the shape of wealth or power, you will fail to use
your influence for harmony, or the elevation of others.

If he takes the form of music, you are likely to go down before his wiles.

If in the form of a fair woman, you will probably crush every kindly
feeling you may have for the caresses of this moral monstrosity.

To feel that you are trying to shield yourself from satan, denotes that you
will endeavor to throw off the bondage of selfish pleasure, and seek to give
others their best deserts.


[197] See Devil.

_Sausage_.

To dream of making sausage, denotes that you will be successful
in many undertakings.

To eat them, you will have a humble, but pleasant home.

_Saw_.

To dream that you use a hand-saw, indicates an energetic and busy time,
and cheerful home life.

To see big saws in machinery, foretells that you will superintend
a big enterprise, and the same will yield fair returns.
For a woman, this dream denotes that she will be esteemed,
and her counsels will be heeded.

To dream of rusty or broken saws, denotes failure and accidents.

To lose a saw, you will engage in affairs which will culminate in disaster.

To hear the buzz of a saw, indicates thrift and prosperity.

To find a rusty saw, denotes that you will probably restore your fortune.

To carry a saw on your back, foretells that you will carry large,
but profitable, responsibilities.

_Sawdust_.

To dream of sawdust, signifies that grievous mistakes will cause
you distress and quarreling in your home.

_Scabbard_.

To dream of a scabbard, denotes some misunderstanding will be
amicably settled.  If you wonder where your scabbard can be,
you will have overpowering difficulties to meet.

_Scaffold_.

To dream of a scaffold, denotes that you will undergo keen disappointment
in failing to secure the object of your affection.

To ascend one, you will be misunderstood and censured by your friends
for some action, which you never committed.

To decend one, you will be guilty of wrong doing, and you
will suffer the penalty.

To fall from one, you will be unexpectedly surprised while engaged
in deceiving and working injury to others.

_Scaldhead_.

To see any one with a scaldhead in your dreams, there will be uneasiness
felt over the sickness or absence of some one near to you.

If you dream that your own head is thus afflicted, you are in danger
of personal illness or accidents.

_Scalding_.

To dream of being scalded, portends that distressing incidents
will blot out pleasurable anticipations.

_Scales_.

To dream of weighing on scales, portends that justice will temper
your conduct, and you will see your prosperity widening.

For a young woman to weigh her lover, the indications are that she will find
him of solid worth, and faithfulness will balance her love.

_Scandal_.

To dream that you are an object of scandal, denotes that you
are not particular to select good and true companions, but rather
enjoy having fast men and women contribute to your pleasure.
Trade and business of any character will suffer dulness
after this dream.

For a young woman to dream that she discussed a scandal, foretells that
she will confer favors, which should be sacred, to some one who
will deceive her into believing that he is honorably inclined.
Marriage rarely follows swiftly after dreaming of scandal.

_Scarcity_.

To dream of scarcity, foretells sorrow in the household and failing affairs.

_Scarlet Fever_.

To dream of scarlet fever, foretells you are in danger of sickness,
or in the power of an enemy.  To dream a relative dies suddenly with it,
foretells you will be overcome by villainous treachery.

_Sceptre_.

To imagine in your dreams that you wield a sceptre, foretells that you
will be chosen by friends to positions of trust, and you will not disappoint
their estimate of your ability.

To dream that others wield the sceptre over you, denotes that you will seek
employment under the supervision of others, rather than exert your energies
to act for yourself.

_School_.

To dream of attending school, indicates distinction in literary work.
If you think you are young and at school as in your youth, you will find
that sorrow and reverses will make you sincerely long for the simple
trusts and pleasures of days of yore.

To dream of teaching a school, foretells that you will strive
for literary attainments, but the bare necessities of life must
first be forthcoming.

To visit the schoolhouse of your childhood days, portends that discontent
and discouraging incidents overshadows the present.

_School Teacher_.

To dream of a school teacher, denotes you are likely to enjoy learning
and amusements in a quiet way.  If you are one, you are likely to reach
desired success in literary and other works.

_Scissors_.

To dream of scissors is an unlucky omen; wives will be jealous
and distrustful of their husbands, and sweethearts will quarrel
and nag each other into crimination and recrimination.
Dulness will overcast business horizons.

To dream that you have your scissors sharpened, denotes that you
will work to do that which will be repulsive to your feelings.

To break them, there will be quarrels, and probable separations for you.

To lose them, you will seek to escape from unpleasant tasks.

_Scorpion_.

To dream of a scorpion, foretells that false friends will improve
opportunities to undermine your prosperity.  If you fail to kill it,
you will suffer loss from an enemy's attack.

_Scrap-book_.

To dream of a scrap-book, denotes disagreeable acquaintances
will shortly be made.

_Scratch_.

To scratch others in your dream, denotes that you will be ill-tempered
and fault-finding in your dealings with others.

If you are scratched, you will be injured by the enmity
of some deceitful person.

_Scratch Head_.

To dream that you scratch your head, denotes strangers will annoy you
by their flattering attentions, which you will feel are only shown
to win favors from you.

_Screech-owl_.

To dream that you hear the shrill startling notes of the screech-owl,
denotes that you will be shocked with news of the desperate illness,
or death of some dear friend.

_Screw_.

To dream of seeing screws, denotes that tedious tasks must
be performed, and peevishness in companions must be combated.
It also denotes that you must be economical and painstaking.

_Sculptor_.

To dream of a sculptor, foretells you will change from your present
position to one less lucrative, but more distinguished.

For a woman to dream that her husband or lover is a sculptor,
foretells she will enjoy favors from men of high position.

_Scum_.

To dream of scum, signifies disappointment will be experienced by you
over social defeats.

_Scythe_.

To dream of a scythe, foretells accidents or sickness will
prevent you from attending to your affairs, or making journeys.
An old or broken scythe, implies separation from friends,
or failure in some business enterprise.

_Sea_.[198]

To dream of hearing the lonely sighing of the sea, foretells that you will be
fated to spend a weary and unfruitful life devoid of love and comradeship.

Dreams of the sea, prognosticate unfulfilled anticipations,
while pleasures of a material form are enjoyed, there is an inward
craving for pleasure that flesh cannot requite.

For a young woman to dream that she glides swiftly over the sea with
her lover, there will come to her sweet fruition of maidenly hopes,
and joy will stand guard at the door of the consummation of changeless vows.


[198] See Ocean.

_Sea Foam_.

For a woman to dream of sea foam, foretells that indiscriminate and
demoralizing pleasures will distract her from the paths of rectitude.
If she wears a bridal veil of sea foam, she will engulf herself in material
pleasure to the exclusion of true refinement and innate modesty.
She will be likely to cause sorrow to some of those dear to her,
through their inability to gratify her ambition.

_Seal_.

To dream that you see seals, denotes that you are striving for a place
above your power to maintain.

Dreams of seals usually show that the dreamer has high aspirations
and discontent will harass him into struggles to advance his position.

_Seamstress_.

To see a seamstress in a dream, portends you will be deterred
from making pleasant visits by unexpected luck.

_Seaport_.

To dream of visiting a seaport, denotes that you will have opportunities
of traveling and acquiring knowledge, but there will be some who will object
to your anticipated tours.

_Seat_.

To think, in a dream, that some one has taken your seat,
denotes you will be tormented by people calling on you for aid.
To give a woman your seat, implies your yielding to some
fair one's artfulness.

_Secret Order_.

To dream of any secret order, denotes a sensitive and excited organism,
and the owner should cultivate practical and unselfish ideas and they may soon
have opportunities for honest pleasures, and desired literary distinctions.

There is a vision of selfish and designing friendships for one who joins
a secret order.

Young women should heed the counsel of their guardians,
lest they fall into discreditable habits after this dream.

If a young woman meets the head of the order, she should oppose
with energy and moral rectitude against allurements that are
set brilliantly and prominently before those of her sex.
For her to think her mother has joined the order, and she is
using her best efforts to have her mother repudiate her vows,
denotes that she will be full of love for her parents, yet will
wring their hearts with anguish by thoughtless disobedience.

To see or hear that the leader is dead, foretells severe strains,
and trials will eventually end in comparative good.

_Seducer_.

For a young woman to dream of being seduced, foretells that she
will be easily influenced by showy persons.

For a man to dream that he has seduced a girl, is a warning for him
to be on his guard, as there are those who will falsely accuse him.
If his sweetheart appears shocked or angry under these proposals,
he will find that the woman he loves is above reproach.
If she consents, he is being used for her pecuniary pleasures.

_Seed_.

To dream of seed, foretells increasing prosperity, though present
indications appear unfavorable.

_Sentry_.

To dream of a sentry, denotes that you will have kind protectors,
and your life will be smoothly conducted.

_Serenade_.

To hear a serenade in your dream, you will have pleasant news
from absent friends, and your anticipations will not fail you.

If you are one of the serenaders, there are many delightful things
in your future.

_Serpents_.[199]

To dream of serpents, is indicative of cultivated morbidity
and depressed surroundings.  There is usually a disappointment
after this dream.


[199] See Snakes and Reptiles.

_Servant_.

To dream of a servant, is a sign that you will be fortunate,
despite gloomy appearances.  Anger is likely to precipitate
you into useless worries and quarrels.

To discharge one, foretells regrets and losses.

To quarrel with one in your dream, indicates that you will, upon waking,
have real cause for censuring some one who is derelict in duty.

To be robbed by one, shows that you have some one near you,
who does not respect the laws of ownership.

_Sewing_.

To dream of sewing on new garments, foretells that domestic peace
will crown your wishes.

_Shakers_.

To dream of seeing members of the sect called Shakers in a dream,
denotes that you will change in your business, and feel coldness
growing towards your sweetheart.

If you imagine you belong to them, you will unexpectedly renounce
all former ties, and seek new pleasures in distant localities.

_Shaking Hands_.

For a young woman to dream that she shakes hands with some prominent ruler,
foretells she will be surrounded with pleasures and distinction
from strangers.  If she avails herself of the opportunity,
she will stand in high favor with friends.  If she finds she must
reach up to shake hands, she will find rivalry and opposition.
If she has on gloves, she will overcome these obstacles.

To shake hands with those beneath you, denotes you will
be loved and honored for your kindness and benevolence.
If you think you or they have soiled hands, you will find
enemies among seeming friends.

For a young woman to dream of shaking hands with a decrepit old man,
foretells she will find trouble where amusement was sought.

_Shakspeare_.

To dream of Shakspeare, denotes that unhappiness and dispondency
will work much anxiety to momentous affairs, and love will be stripped
of passion's fever.

To read Shakspeare's works, denotes that you will unalterably
attach yourself to literary accomplishments.

_Shampoo_.

To dream of seeing shampooing going on, denotes that you will engage
in undignified affairs to please others

To have your own head shampooed, you will soon make a secret trip,
in which you will have much enjoyment, if you succeed in keeping
the real purport from your family or friends.

_Shanty_.

To dream of a shanty, denotes that you will leave home in the quest
of health.  This also warns you of decreasing prosperity.

_Shark_.

To dream of sharks, denotes formidable enemies.

To see a shark pursuing and attacking you, denotes that unavoidable
reverses will sink you into dispondent foreboding.

To see them sporting in clear water, foretells that while you are basking
in the sunshine of women and prosperity, jealousy is secretly, but surely,
working you disquiet, and unhappy fortune.

To see a dead one, denotes reconciliation and renewed prosperity.

_Shave_.

To merely contemplate getting a shave, in your dream, denotes you
will plan for the successful development of enterprises,
but will fail to generate energy sufficient to succeed.

_Shaving_.

To dream that you are being shaved, portends that you will let
imposters defraud you.

To shave yourself, foretells that you will govern your own business
and dictate to your household, notwithstanding that the presence
of a shrew may cause you quarrels.

If your face appears smooth, you will enjoy quiet, and your conduct
will hot be questioned by your companions.  If old and rough,
there will be many squalls or, the matrimonial sea.

If your razor is dull and pulls your face, you will give your friends
cause to criticize your private life.

If your beard seems gray, you will be absolutely devoid of any sense
of justice to those having claims upon you.

For a woman to see men shaving, foretells that her nature will become
sullied by indulgence in gross pleasures.

If she dreams of being shaved, she will assume so much masculinity that men
will turn from her in disgust.

_Shawl_.

To dream of a shawl, denotes that some one will offer you flattery and favor.

To lose your shawl, foretells sorrow and discomfort.
A young woman is in danger of being jilted by a good-looking man,
after this dream.

_Shears_.

To see shears in your dream, denotes that you will become miserly
and disagreeable in your dealings.

To see them broken, you will lose friends and standing by
your eccentric demeanor.

_Sheaves_.

To dream of sheaves, denotes joyful occasions.
Prosperity holds before you a panorama of delightful events,
and fields of enterprise and fortunate gain.

_Sheep_.[200]

To dream of shearing them, denotes a season of profitable enterprises
will shower down upon you.

To see flocks of sheep, there will be much rejoicing among farmers,
and other trades will prosper.

To see them looking scraggy and sick, you will be thrown into despair
by the miscarriage of some plan, which promised rich returns.

To eat the flesh of sheep, denotes that ill-natured persons
will outrage your feelings.


[200] See Lamb and Ram.

_Sheet Iron_.

To see sheet iron in your dream, denotes you are unfortunately
listening to the admonition of others.  To walk on it,
signifies distasteful engagements.

_Shells_.[201]

To walk among and gather shells in your dream, denotes extravagance.
Pleasure will leave you naught but exasperating regrets and memories.


[201] See Mussels and Oysters.

_Shelter_.

To dream that you are building a shelter, signifies that you
will escape the evil designs of enemies.

If you are seeking shelter, you will be guilty of cheating,
and will try to justify yourself.

_Shelves_.[202]

To see empty shelves in dreams, indicates losses and consequent gloom.

Full shelves, augurs happy contentment through the fulfillment
of hope and exertions.


[202] See Store.

_Shepherd_.

To see shepherds in your dreams watching their flocks,
portends bounteous crops and pleasant relations for the farmer,
also much enjoyment and profit for others.

To see them in idleness, foretells sickness and bereavement.

_Sheriff_.[203]

To dream of seeing a sheriff, denotes that you will suffer great uneasiness
over the uncertain changes which loom up before you.

To imagine that you are elected sheriff or feel interested in the office,
denotes that you will participate in some affair which will afford you
neither profit nor honor.

To escape arrest, you will be able to further engage in illicit affairs.


[203] See Bailiff and Police.

_Ship_.

To dream of ships, foretells honor and unexpected elevation to ranks
above your mode of life.

To hear of a shipwreck is ominous of a disastrous turn in affairs.
Your female friends will betray you.

To lose your life in one, denotes that you will have an exceeding
close call on your life or honor.

To see a ship on her way through a tempestuous storm,
foretells that you will be unfortunate in business transactions,
and you will be perplexed to find means of hiding some intrigue
from the public, as your partner in the affair will threaten
you with betrayal.

To see others shipwrecked, you will seek in vain to shelter some friend
from disgrace and insolvency.

_Shirt_.

To dream of putting on your shirt, is a sign that you will estrange
yourself from your sweetheart by your faithless conduct.

To lose your shirt, augurs disgrace in business or love.

A torn shirt, represents misfortune and miserable surroundings.

A soiled shirt, denotes that contagious diseases will confront you.

_Shirt-studs_.

To dream of shirt-studs, foretells you will struggle to humor your pride,
and will usually be successful.  If they are diamonds, and the center one
is larger than the others, you will enjoy wealth, or have an easy time,
surrounded by congenial friends.

_Shoemaker_.

To see a shoemaker in your dream, warns you that indications are
unfavorable to your advancement.  For a woman to dream that her
husband or lover is a shoemaker, foretells competency will be hers;
her wishes will be gratified.

_Shoes_.

To dream of seeing your shoes ragged and soiled, denotes that you
will make enemies by your unfeeling criticisms.

To have them blacked in your dreams, foretells improvement in your affairs,
and some important event will cause you satisfaction.

New shoes, augur changes which will prove beneficial.
If they pinch your feet, you will be uncomfortably exposed
to the practical joking of the fun-loving companions of your sex.

To find them untied, denotes losses, quarrels and ill-health.


To lose them, is a sign of desertion and divorces.

To dream that your shoes have been stolen during the night,
but you have two pairs of hose, denotes you will have a loss,
but will gain in some other pursuit.

For a young woman to dream that her shoes are admired while on her feet,
warns her to be cautious in allowing newly introduced people, and men
of any kind, to approach her in a familiar way.

_Shooting_.[204]

To dream that you see or hear shooting, signifies unhappiness between
married couples and sweethearts because of over-weaning selfishness,
also unsatisfactory business and tasks because of negligence.


[204] See Pistol.

_Shop_.[205]

To dream of a shop, denotes that you will be opposed in every attempt
you make for advancement by scheming and jealous friends.


[205] See Store.

_Shot_.

To dream that you are shot, and are feeling the sensations of dying,
denotes that you are to meet unexpected abuse from the ill feelings
of friends, but if you escape death by waking, you will be fully
reconciled with them later on.

To dream that a preacher shoots you, signifies that you will be annoyed
by some friend advancing views condemnatory to those entertained by yourself.

_Shotgun_.[206]

To dream of a shotgun, foretells domestic troubles and worry
with children and servants.

To shoot both barrels of a double-barreled shotgun, foretells that you will
meet such exasperating and unfeeling attention in your private and public
life that suave manners giving way under the strain and your righteous wrath
will be justifiable.

[206] See Pistol, Revolver, etc.

_Shoulder_.

To dream of seeing naked shoulders, foretells that happy changes will make
you look upon the world in a different light than formerly.

To see your own shoulders appearing thin, denotes that you will depend upon
the caprices of others for entertainment and pleasure.

_Shovel_.

To see a shovel in a dream, signifies laborious but withal
pleasant work will be undertaken.  A broken or old one,
implies frustration of hopes.

_Shower_.[207]

To dream that you are in a shower, foretells that you will derive
exquisite pleasure in the study of creation and the proper placing
of selfish pleasures.


[207] See Rain.

_Shrew_.

To dream of a shrew, foretells that you will have a task to keep
some friend in a cheerful frame of mind, and that you will unfit
yourself for the experiences of everyday existence.

_Shroud_.

To dream of a shroud, denotes sickness and its attendant distress and anxiety,
coupled with the machinations of the evil-minded and false friends.
Business will threaten decline after this dream.

To see shrouded corpses, denotes a multitude of misfortunes.

To see a shroud removed from a corpse, denotes that quarrels
will result in alienation.

_Sickness_.

To dream of sickness, is a sign of trouble and real sickness in your family.
Discord is sure to find entrance also.

To dream of your own sickness, is a warning to be unusually cautious
of your person.

To see any of your family pale and sick, foretells that some
event will break unexpectedly upon your harmonious hearthstone.
Sickness is usually attendant upon this dream.

_Side_.

To dream of seeing only the side of any object, denotes that some person
is going to treat your honest proposals with indifference.

To dream that your side pains you, there will be vexations in your affairs
that will gall your endurance.

To dream that you have a fleshy, healthy side, you will be successful
in courtship and business.

_Siege_.

For a young woman to dream that she is in a siege, and sees cavalry
around her, denotes that she will have serious drawbacks to enjoyments,
but will surmount them finally, and receive much pleasure and profit
from seeming disappointments.

_Sieve_.

To dream of a sieve, foretells some annoying transaction will soon be made
by you, which will probably be to your loss.  If the meshes are too small,
you will have the chance to reverse a decision unfavorable to yourself.
If too large, you will eventually lose what you have recently acquired.

_Sigh_.

To dream that you are sighing over any trouble or sad event,
denotes that you will have unexpected sadness, but some redeeming
brightness in your season of trouble.

To hear the sighing of others, foretells that the misconduct
of dear friends will oppress you with a weight of gloom.

_Silk_.

To dream of wearing silk clothes, is a sign of high ambitions being gratified,
and friendly relations will be established between those who were estranged.

For a young woman to dream of old silk, denotes that she will have much
pride in her ancestors, and will be wooed by a wealthy, but elderly person.
If the silk is soiled or torn, she will drag her ancestral pride in
the slums of disgrace.

_Silkworm_.

If you dream of a silkworm, you will engage in a very profitable work,
which will also place you in a prominent position.

To see them dead, or cutting through their cocoons, is a sign
of reverses and trying times.

_Silver_.

To dream of silver, is a warning against depending too largely on money
for real happiness and contentment.

To find silver money, is indicative of shortcomings in others.
Hasty conclusions are too frequently drawn by yourself for your own
peace of mind.

To dream of silverware, denotes worries and unsatisfied desires.

_Single_.

For married persons to dream that they are single, foretells that their union
will not be harmonious, and constant despondency will confront them.

_Singing_.

To hear singing in your dreams, betokens a cheerful spirit
and happy companions.  You are soon to have promising news
from the absent.

If you are singing while everything around you gives promise of happiness,
jealousy will insinuate a sense of insincerity into your joyousness.
If there are notes of sadness in the song, you will be unpleasantly
surprised at the turn your affairs will take.

Ribald songs, signifies gruesome and extravagant waste.

_Skate_.

To dream that you are skating on ice, foretells that you
are in danger of losing employment, or valuable articles.
If you break through the ice, you will have unworthy friends
to counsel you.

To see others skating, foretells that disagreeable people will connect
your name in scandal with some person who admires you.

To see skates, denotes discord among your associates.

To see young people skating on roller skates, foretells that you
will enjoy good health, and feel enthusiastic over the pleasures
you are able to contribute to others.

_Skeleton_.

To dream of seeing a skeleton, is prognostic of illness, misunderstanding and
injury at the hands of others, especially enemies.

To dream that you are a skeleton, is a sign that you are suffering
under useless worry, and should cultivate a milder disposition.

If you imagine that one haunts you, there will soon come to you
a shocking accident or death, or the trouble may take the form
of financial disaster.

_Skull_.

To dream of skulls grinning at you, is a sign of domestic quarrels and jars.
Business will feel a shrinkage if you handle them.

To see a friend's skull, denotes that you will receive injury
from a friend because of your being preferred to him.

To see your own skull, denotes that you will be the servant of remorse.

_Sky_.[208]

To dream of the sky, signifies distinguished honors and interesting travel
with cultured companions, if the sky is clear.  Otherwise, it portends
blasted expectations, and trouble with women.

To dream of floating in the sky among weird faces and animals,
and wondering all the while if you are really awake, or only dreaming,
foretells that all trouble, the most excruciating pain,
that reach even the dullest sense will be distilled into one drop
called jealousy, and will be inserted into your faithful love,
and loyalty will suffer dethronement.

To see the sky turn red, indicates that public disquiet and rioting
may be expected.


[208] See Heaven and Illumination.

_Slander_.

To dream that you are slandered, is a sign of your untruthful
dealings with ignorance.

If you slander any one, you will feel the loss of friends through selfishness.

_Slaughter-house_.[209]

To dream of a slaughter-house, denotes that you will be
feared more than loved by your sweetheart or mistress.
Your business will divulge a private drain, and there will
be unkind insinuations.


[209] See Butcher.

_Sleep_.

To dream of sleeping on clean, fresh beds, denotes peace and favor
from those whom you love.

To sleep in unnatural resting places, foretells sickness
and broken engagements.

To sleep beside a little child, betokens domestic joys and reciprocated love.

To see others sleeping, you will overcome all opposition in your pursuit
for woman's favor.

To dream of sleeping with a repulsive person or object,
warns you that your love will wane before that of your sweetheart,
and you will suffer for your escapades.

For a young woman to dream of sleeping with her lover or some
fascinating object, warns her against yielding herself a willing
victim to his charms.

_Sleigh_.

To see a sleigh in your dreams, foretells you will fail in
some love adventure, and incur the displeasure of a friend.
To ride in one, foretells injudicious engagements will be entered
into by you.

_Sliding_.

To dream of sliding, portends disappointments in affairs,
and sweethearts will break vows.

To slide down a hillside covered with green grass, foretells that you
will be deceived into ruin by flattering promises.

_Slighted_.

To dream of slighting any person or friend, denotes that you
will fail to find happiness, as you will cultivate a morose
and repellent bearing.

If you are slighted, you will have cause to bemoan your unfortunate position.

_Slippers_.

To dream of slippers, warns you that you are about to perform
an unfortunate alliance or intrigue.  You are likely to find
favor with a married person which will result in trouble,
if not scandal.

To dream that your slippers are much admired, foretells that you
will be involved in a flirtation, which will suggest disgrace.

_Smallpox_.

To see people with smallpox in your dream, denotes unexpected
and shocking sickness, and probably contagion.  You will meet
failure in accomplishing your designs.

_Smoke_.

To dream of smoke, foretells that you will be perplexed with doubts and fears.

To be overcome with smoke, denotes that dangerous persons are victimizing
you with flattery.

_Snakes_.[210]

For a woman to dream that a dead snake is biting her, foretells she
will suffer from malice of a pretended friend.

To dream of snakes, is a foreboding of evil in its various forms and stages.

To see them wriggling and falling over others, foretells struggles
with fortune and remorse.

To kill them, you will feel that you have used every opportunity
of advancing your own interests, or respecting that of others.
You will enjoy victory over enemies.

To walk over them, you will live in constant fear of sickness, and selfish
persons will seek to usurp your place in your companion's life.

If they bite you, you will succumb to evil influences, and enemies
will injure your business.

To dream that a common spotted snake approaches you from green herbs,
and you quickly step aside as it passes you, and after you had forgotten
the incident to again see it approaching and growing in dimensions
as it nears you, finally taking on the form of an enormous serpent;
if you then, after frantic efforts, succeed in escaping its attack,
and altogether lose sight of it, it foretells that you will soon
imagine you are being disobeyed and slighted, and things will go on
from bad to worse.  Sickness, uneasiness and unkindness will increase
to frightful proportions in your mind; but they will adjust themselves
to a normal basis, and by the putting aside of imaginary trouble,
and masterfully shouldering duties, you will be contented and repaid.

To dream that a snake coils itself around you and darts its tongue out at you,
is a sign that you will be placed in a position where you will be powerless
in the hands of enemies, and you will be attacked with sickness.

To handle them, you will use strategy to aid in overthrowing opposition.

To see hairs turn into snakes, foretells that seeming insignificant
incidents will make distressing cares for you.

If snakes turn into unnatural shapes, you will have troubles which will
be dispelled if treated with indifference, calmness and will power.

To see or step on snakes while wading or bathing, denotes that there
will be trouble where unalloyed pleasure was anticipated.

To see them bite others, foretells that some friend will be injured
and criticised by you.

To see little snakes, denotes you will entertain persons
with friendly hospitality who will secretly defame you and work
to overthrow your growing prospects.

To see children playing with them, is a sign that you will be
nonplussed to distinguish your friends from your enemies.
For a woman to think a child places one on the back of her head,
and she hears the snake's hisses, foretells that she will be
persuaded to yield up some possession seemingly for her good,
but she will find out later that she has been inveigled
into an intrigue in which enemies will tantalize her.
To see snakes raising up their heads in a path just behind
your friend, denotes that you will discover a conspiracy
which has been formed to injure your friend and also yourself.
To think your friend has them under control, denotes that
some powerful agency will be employed in your favor to ward
off evil influences.

For a woman to hypnotize a snake, denotes your rights will be assailed,
but you will be protected by law and influential friends.


[210] See Serpents and Reptiles.

_Snail_.

Snails crawling in your dream, signifies that unhealthful
conditions surround you.

To step on them, denotes that you will come in contact
with disagreeable people.

_Sneeze_.

To dream that you sneeze, denotes that hasty tidings will cause
you to change your plans.

To see or hear others sneeze, some people will bore you with visits.

_Snouts_.

To dream of snouts, foretells dangerous seasons for you.
Enemies are surrounding you, and difficulties will be numerous.

_Snow_.

To see snow in your dreams, denotes that while you have no real misfortune,
there will be the appearance of illness, and unsatisfactory enterprises.

To find yourself in a snow storm, denotes sorrow and disappointment
in failure to enjoy some long-expected pleasure.  There always follows
more or less discouragement after this dream.

If you eat snow, you will fail to realize ideals.

To see dirty snow, foretells that your pride will be humbled,
and you will seek reconciliation with some person whom you held
in haughty contempt.

To see it melt, your fears will turn into joy.

To see large, white snowflakes falling while looking through a window,
foretells that you will have an angry interview with your sweetheart,
and the estrangement will be aggravated by financial depression.

To see snow-capped mountains in the distance, warns you that your longings
and ambitions will bring no worthy advancement.

To see the sun shining through landscapes of snow, foretells that you
will conquer adverse fortune and possess yourself of power.

For a young woman to dream of sleighing, she will find much opposition
to her choice of a lover, and her conduct will cause her much ill-favor.

To dream of snowballing, denotes that you will have to struggle
with dishonorable issues, and if your judgment is not well grounded,
you will suffer defeat.

If snowbound or lost, there will be constant waves of ill luck breaking
in upon you.

_Snuff_.

To dream of snuff, signifies your enemies are seducing the confidence of
your friends.  For a woman to use it in her dreams, foretells complications
which will involve her separation from a favored friend.

_Soap_.

To dream of soap, foretells that friendships will reveal
interesting entertainment.  Farmers will have success in
their varied affairs.

For a young woman to be making soap, omens a substantial and satisfactory
competency will be hers.

_Socialist_.

To see a socialist in your dreams, your unenvied position among
friends and acquaintances is predicted.  Your affairs will be
neglected for other imaginary duties.

_Soda Fountain_.

To dream of being at a soda fountain, denotes pleasure and profit
after many exasperating experiences.

To treat others to this and other delectable iced drinks; you will be
rewarded in your efforts, though the outlook appears full of contradictions.
Inharmonious environments, and desired results will be forthcoming.

_Son_.

To dream of your son, if you have one, as being handsome and dutiful,
foretells that he will afford you proud satisfaction, and will aspire
to high honors.  If he is maimed, or suffering from illness or accident,
there is trouble ahead for you.

For a mother to dream that her son has fallen to the bottom of a well,
and she hears cries, it is a sign of deep grief, losses and sickness.
If she rescues him, threatened danger will pass away unexpectedly.

_Soot_.

If you see soot in your dreams, it means that you will meet with ill success
in your affairs.  Lovers will be quarrelsome and hard to please.

_Sold_.

To dream that you have sold anything, denotes that unfavorable business
will worry you.

_Soldiers_.

To see soldiers marching in your dreams, foretells for you a period
of flagrant excesses, but at the same time you will be promoted
to elevations above rivals.

To see wounded soldiers, is a sign of the misfortune of
others causing you serious complications in your affairs.
Your sympathy will outstrip your judgment.

To dream that you are a worthy soldier, you will have literal
fulfilment of ideals.  Women are in danger of disrepute if they
find themselves dreaming of soldiers.

_Somnambulist_.

To imagine while dreaming that you are a somnambulist, portends that you
will unwittingly consent to some agreement of plans which will bring you
anxiety or ill fortune.

_Sorcerer_.

To dream of a sorcerer, foretells your ambitions will undergo
strange disappointments and change.

_Sores_.

To dream of seeing sores, denotes that illness will cause you
loss and mental distress.

To dress a sore, foretells that your personal wishes and desires
will give place to the pleasure of others.

To dream of an infant having a deep sore so that you can see the bone,
denotes that distressing and annoying incidents will detract from your plans,
and children will be threatened with contagion.

To dream of sores on yourself, portends early decay of health
and impaired mentality.  Sickness and unsatisfactory business
will follow this dream.

_Soul_.

To dream of seeing your soul leaving your body, signifies you
are in danger of sacrificing yourself to useless designs,
which will dwarf your sense of honor and cause you to become
mercenary and uncharitable.

For an artist to see his soul in another, foretells he will gain distinction
if he applies himself to his work and leaves off sentimental ro^les.

To imagine another's soul is in you, denotes you will derive solace
and benefit from some stranger who is yet to come into your life.

For a young woman musician to dream that she sees another young
woman on the stage clothed in sheer robes, and imagining it is
her own soul in the other person, denotes she will be outrivaled
in some great undertaking.

To dream that you are discussing the immortality of your soul,
denotes you will improve opportunities which will aid you
in gaining desired knowledge and pleasure of intercourse
with intellectual people.

_Soup_.

To dream of soup, is a forerunner of good tidings and comfort.

To see others taking soup, foretells that you will have many good
chances to marry.

For a young woman to make soup, signifies that she will not be compelled
to do menial work in her household, as she will marry a wealthy man.

To drink oyster soup made of sweet milk, there will be quarrels
with some bad luck, but reconciliations will follow.

_Sovereign_.

To dream of a sovereign, denotes increasing prosperity and new friends.

_Sowing_.

To dream that you are sowing seed, foretells to the farmer fruitful promises,
if he sows in new ploughed soil.

To see others sowing, much business activity is portended,
which will bring gain to all.

_Spade_.

To dream of a kind of shovel called spade, denotes that you will have work
to complete, which will give you much annoyance in superintending.

If you dream of cards named spades, you will be enticed into follies
which will bring you grief and misfortune.

For a gambler to dream that spades are trumps, means that unfortunate
deals will deplete his winnings.

_Sparrow_.

To dream of sparrows, denotes that you will be surrounded with love
and comfort, and this will cause you to listen with kindly interest
to tales of woe, and your benevolence will gain you popularity.

To see them distressed or wounded, foretells sadness.

_Spectacles_.

To dream of spectacles, foretells that strangers will cause changes
in your affairs.  Frauds will be practised on your credulity.

To dream that you see broken spectacles, denotes estrangement
caused by fondness for illegal pleasures.

_Spice_.

To dream of spice, foretells you will probably damage your own reputation
in search of pleasure.  For a young woman to dream of eating spice,
is an omen of deceitful appearances winning her confidence.

_Spider_.

To dream of a spider, denotes that you will be careful and energetic
in your labors, and fortune will be amassed to pleasing proportions.

To see one building its web, foretells that you will be happy
and secure in your own home.

To kill one, signifies quarrels with your wife or sweetheart.

If one bites you, you will be the victim of unfaithfulness and will suffer
from enemies in your business.

If you dream that you see many spiders hanging in their webs around you,
foretells most favorable conditions, fortune, good health and friends.

To dream of a large spider confronting you, signifies that your elevation
to fortune will be swift, unless you are in dangerous contact.

To dream that you see a very large spider and a small one coming
towards you, denotes that you will be prosperous, and that you
will feel for a time that you are immensely successful; but if
the large one bites you, enemies will steal away your good fortune.
If the little one bites you, you will be harassed with little spites
and jealousies.  To imagine that you are running from a large spider,
denotes you will lose fortune in slighting opportunities.
If you kill the spider you will eventually come into fair estate.
If it afterwards returns to life and pursues you, you will be
oppressed by sickness and wavering fortunes.

For a young woman to dream she sees gold spiders crawling around her,
foretells that her fortune and prospect for happiness will improve,
and new friends will surround her.

_Spider-web_.

To see spider-webs, denotes pleasant associations and fortunate ventures.

_Spinning_.

To dream that you are spinning, means that you will engage in some enterprise,
which will be all you could wish.

_Spirit or Specter_.

To see spirits in a dream, denotes that some unexpected trouble will
confront you.  If they are white-robed, the health of your nearest friend
is threatened, or some business speculation will be disapproving.
If they are robed in black, you will meet with treachery and unfaithfulness.

If a spirit speaks, there is some evil near you, which you might avert
if you would listen to the counsels of judgment.

To dream that you hear spirits knocking on doors or walls,
denotes that trouble will arise unexpectedly.

To see them moving draperies, or moving behind them, is a warning to hold
control over your feelings, as you are likely to commit indiscretions.
Quarrels are also threatened.

To see the spirit of your friend floating in your room,
foretells disappointment and insecurity.

To hear music supposedly coming from spirits, denotes unfavorable
changes and sadness in the household.

_Spitting_.

To dream of spitting, denotes unhappy terminations of seemingly
auspicious undertakings.  For some one to spit on you,
foretells disagreements and alienation of affections.

_Spleen_.

To dream of spleen, denotes that you will have a misunderstanding
with some party who will injure you.

_Splendor_.

To dream that you live in splendor, denotes that you will succeed
to elevations, and will reside in a different state to the one
you now occupy.

To see others thus living, signifies pleasure derived from the interest
that friends take in your welfare.

_Splinter_.

To dream of splinters sticking into your flesh, denotes that you will have
many vexations from members of your family or from jealous rivals.

If while you are visiting you stick a splinter in your foot, you will
soon make, or receive, a visit which will prove extremely unpleasant.
Your affairs will go slightly wrong through your continued neglect.

_Sponges_.

Sponges seen in a dream, denote that deception is being practised upon you.

To use one in erasing, you will be the victim of folly.

_Spools_.

To dream of spools of thread, indicates some long and arduous tasks,
but which when completed will meet your most sanguine expectations.
If they are empty, there will be disappointments for you.

_Spoons_.

To see, or use, spoons in a dream, denotes favorable signs of advancement.
Domestic affairs will afford contentment.

To think a spoon is lost, denotes that you will be suspicious
of wrong doing.

To steal one, is a sign that you will deserve censure for your contemptible
meanness in your home.

To dream of broken or soiled spoons, signifies loss and trouble.

_Spring_.

To dream that spring is advancing, is a sign of fortunate undertakings
and cheerful companions.

To see spring appearing unnaturally, is a foreboding of disquiet and losses.

_Spur_.

To dream of wearing spurs, denotes that you will engage
in some unpleasant controversy.

To see others with them on, foretells that enmity is working you trouble.

_Spy_.

To dream that spies are harassing you, denotes dangerous
quarrels and uneasiness.

To dream that you are a spy, denotes that you will make unfortunate ventures.

_Spy-glass_.

To dream that you are looking through a spy-glass, denotes that changes
will soon occur to your disadvantage.

To see a broken or imperfect one, foretells unhappy dissensions
and loss of friends.

_Squall_.

To dream of squalls, foretells disappointing business and unhappiness.

_Squinting_.

To dream that you see some person with squinting eyes, denotes that you
will be annoyed with unpleasant people.

For a man to dream that his sweetheart, or some good-looking girl,
squints her eyes at him, foretells that he is threatened with loss
by seeking the favors of women.  For a young woman to have this dream
about men, she will be in danger of losing her fair reputation.

_Squirrel_.

To dream of seeing squirrels, denotes that pleasant friends will soon
visit you.  You will see advancement in your business also.

To kill a squirrel, denotes that you will be unfriendly and disliked.

To pet one, signifies family joy.

To see a dog chasing one, foretells disagreements and
unpleasantness among friends.

_Stable_.

To dream of a stable, is a sign of fortune and advantageous surroundings.

To see a stable burning denotes successful changes, or it may be seen
in actual life.

_Stag_.

To see stags in your dream, foretells that you will have honest
and true friends, and will enjoy delightful entertainments.

_Stage Driver_.

To dream of a stage driver, signifies you will go on a strange
journey in quest of fortune and happiness.

_Stain_.

To see stain on your hands, or clothing, while dreaming,
foretells that trouble over small matters will assail you.

To see a stain on the garments of others, or on their flesh,
foretells that some person will betray you.

_Stairs_.

To dream of passing up a stairs, foretells good fortune and much happiness.

If you fall down stairs, you will be the object of hatred and envy.

To walk down, you will be unlucky in your affairs, and your lovemaking
will be unfavorable.

To see broad, handsome stairs, foretells approaching riches and honors.

To see others going down stairs, denotes that unpleasant conditions
will take the place of pleasure.

To sit on stair steps, denotes a gradual rise in fortune and delight.

_Stall_.

To dream of a stall, denotes impossible results from some enterprise
will be expected by you.

_Stallion_.

To dream of a stallion, foretells prosperous conditions are approaching you,
in which you will hold a position which will confer honor upon you.

To dream you ride a fine stallion, denotes you will rise to position
and affluence in a phenomenal way; however, your success will warp
your morality and sense of justice.  To see one with the rabies,
foretells that wealthy surroundings will cause you to assume arrogance,
which will be distasteful to your friends, and your pleasures
will be deceitful.

_Stammer_.

To dream that you stammer in your conversation, denotes that worry
and illness will threaten your enjoyment.  To hear others stammer,
foretells that unfriendly persons will delight in annoying you
and giving you needless worry.

_Standard-bearer_.

To dream that you are a standard-bearer, denotes that your occupation
will be pleasant, but varied.

To see others acting as standard-bearers, foretells that you
will be jealous and envious of some friend.

_Stars_.

To dream of looking upon clear, shining stars, foretells good
health and prosperity.  If they are dull or red, there is trouble
and misfortune ahead.

To see a shooting or falling star, denotes sadness and grief.

To see stars appearing and vanishing mysteriously, there will be some strange
changes and happenings in your near future.

If you dream that a star falls on you, there will be a bereavement
in your family.

To see them rolling around on the earth, is a sign of formidable danger
and trying times.

_Starving_.

To dream of being in a starving condition, portends unfruitful labors
and a dearth of friends.

To see others in this condition, omens misery and dissatisfaction
with present companions and employment.

_Statues_.

To see statues in dreams, signifies estrangement from a loved one.
Lack of energy will cause you disappointment in realizing wishes.

_Stealing_.

To dream of stealing, or of seeing others commit this act,
foretells bad luck and loss of character.

To be accused of stealing, denotes that you will be misunderstood
in some affair, and suffer therefrom, but you will eventually find
that this will bring you favor.

To accuse others, denotes that you will treat some person
with hasty inconsideration.

_Steeple_.

To see a steeple rising from a church, is a harbinger of
sickness and reverses.

A broken one, points to death in your circle, or friends.

To climb a steeple, foretells that you will have serious difficulties,
but will surmount them.

To fall from one, denotes losses in trade and ill health.

_Steps_.[211]

To dream that you ascend steps, denotes that fair prospects
will relieve former anxiety.

To decend them, you may look for misfortune.

To fall down them, you are threatened with unexpected failure
in your affairs.


[211] See Stairs.

_Step-sister_.

To dream of a step-sister, denotes you will have unavoidable care
and annoyance upon you.

_Stethoscope_.

To dream of a stethoscope, foretells calamity to your hopes and enterprises.
There will be troubles and recriminations in love.

_Sticks_.

To dream of sticks, is an unlucky omen.

_Stillborn_.

To dream of a stillborn infant, denotes that some distressing
incident will come before your notice.

_Stilts_.

To dream of walking on stilts, denotes that your fortune is
in an insecure condition.

To fall from them, or feel them break beneath you, you will be precipitated
into embarrassments by trusting your affairs to the care of others.

_Sting_.

To feel that any insect stings you in a dream, is a foreboding
of evil and unhappiness.

For a young woman to dream that she is stung, is ominous of sorrow
and remorse from over-confidence in men.

_Stockings_.[212]

To dream of stockings, denotes that you will derive pleasure
from dissolute companionship.

For a young woman to see her stockings ragged, or worn,
foretells that she will be guilty of unwise, if not immoral conduct.
To dream that she puts on fancy stockings, she will be fond
of the attention of men, and she should be careful to whom she
shows preference.  If white ones appear to be on her feet,
she is threatened with woeful disappointment or illness.


[212] See Knitting.

_Stone_.[213]

To see stones in your dreams, foretells numberless perplexities and failures.

To walk among rocks, or stones, omens that an uneven and rough
pathway will be yours for at least a while.

To make deals in ore-bearing rock lands, you will be
successful in business after many lines have been tried.
If you fail to profit by the deal, you will have disappointments.
If anxiety is greatly felt in closing the trade, you will succeed
in buying or selling something that will prove profitable to you.

Small stones or pebbles, implies that little worries and vexations
will irritate you.

If you throw a stone, you will have cause to admonish a person.

If you design to throw a pebble or stone at some belligerent person,
it denotes that some evil feared by you will pass because of your untiring
attention to right principles.


[213] See Rock.

_Stone Mason_.

To see stone masons at work while dreaming, foretells disappointment.

To dream that you are a stone mason, portends that your labors will
be unfruitful, and your companions will be dull and uncongenial.

_Storage Battery_.

To dream of a storage battery, opportune speculations will return
you handsome gains.

_Store_.

To dream of a store filled with merchandise, foretells
prosperity and advancement.

An empty one, denotes failure of efforts and quarrels.

To dream that your store is burning, is a sign of renewed activity
in business and pleasure.

If you find yourself in a department store, it foretells that much pleasure
will be derived from various sources of profit.

To sell goods in one, your advancement will be accelerated by your energy
and the efforts of friends.

To dream that you sell a pair of soiled, gray cotton gloves to a woman,
foretells that your opinion of women will place you in hazardous positions.
If a woman has this dream, her preference for some one of the male sex
will not be appreciated very much by him.

_Storm_.[214]

To see and hear a storm approaching, foretells continued sickness,
unfavorable business, and separation from friends, which will cause
added distress.  If the storm passes, your affliction will not
be so heavy.


[214] See Hurricane and Rain.

_Straw_.

If you dream of straw, your life is threatened with emptiness and failure.

To see straw piles burning, is a signal of prosperous times.

To feed straw to stock, foretells that you will make poor provisions
for those depending upon you.

_Strawberries_.

To dream of strawberries, is favorable to advancement and pleasure.
You will obtain some long wished-for object.

To eat them, denotes requited love.

To deal in them, denotes abundant harvest and happiness.

_Street_.

To dream that you are walking in a street, foretells ill luck and worries.
You will almost despair of reaching the goal you have set up
in your aspirations.

To be in a familiar street in a distant city, and it appears dark,
you will make a journey soon, which will not afford the profit
or pleasure contemplated.  If the street is brilliantly lighted,
you will engage in pleasure, which will quickly pass,
leaving no comfort.

To pass down a street and feel alarmed lest a thug attack you,
denotes that you are venturing upon dangerous ground in advancing
your pleasure or business.

_Street-poster_.

To dream that you are a street-poster, denotes that you will undertake
some unpleasant and unprofitable work.

To see street-posters at work, foretells disagreeable news.

_Struggling_.

To dream of struggling, foretells that you will encounter
serious difficulties, but if you gain the victory in your struggle,
you will also surmount present obstacles.

_Stumble_.

If you stumble in a dream while walking or running, you will meet
with disfavor, and obstructions will bar your path to success,
but you will eventually surmount them, if you do not fall.

_Stumps_.

To dream of a stump, foretells you are to have reverses and will depart
from your usual mode of living.  To see fields of stumps, signifies you
will be unable to defend yourself from the encroachments of adversity.
To dig or pull them up, is a sign that you will extricate yourself from
the environment of poverty by throwing off sentiment and pride and meeting
the realities of life with a determination to overcome whatever opposition
you may meet.

_Suckle_.[215]

To see the young taking suckle, denotes contentment and favorable
conditions for success is unfolding to you.


[215] See Nursing.

_Suffocating_.[216]

To dream that you are suffocating, denotes that you will experience
deep sorrow and mortification at the conduct of some one you love.
You should be careful of your health after this dream.


[216] See Smoke.

_Sugar_.

To dream of sugar, denotes that you will be hard to please
in your domestic life, and will entertain jealousy while
seeing no cause for aught but satisfaction and secure joys.
There may be worries, and your strength and temper taxed
after this dream.

To eat sugar in your dreams, you will have unpleasant matters to contend
with for a while, but they will result better than expected.

To price sugar, denotes that you are menaced by enemies.

To deal in sugar and see large quantities of it being delivered to you,
you will barely escape a serious loss.

To see a cask of sugar burst and the sugar spilling out,
foretells a slight loss.

To hear a negro singing while unloading sugar, some seemingly insignificant
affair will bring you great benefit, either in business or social states.

_Sugar-tongs_.

To dream of sugar-tongs, foretells that disagreeable tidings
of wrong-doings will be received by you.

_Suicide_.

To commit suicide in a dream, foretells that misfortune will hang
heavily over you.

To see or hear others committing this deed, foretells that the failure
of others will affect your interests.

For a young woman to dream that her lover commits suicide, her disappointment
by the faithlessness of her lover is accentuated.

_Sulphur_.

To dream of sulphur, warns you to use much discretion in your dealings,
as you are threatened with foul play.

To see sulphur burning, is ominous of great care attendant upon your wealth.

To eat sulphur, indicates good health and consequent pleasure.

_Sun_.

To dream of seeing a clear, shining sunrise, foretells joyous
events and prosperity, which give delightful promises.

To see the sun at noontide, denotes the maturity of ambitions
and signals unbounded satisfaction.

To see the sunset, is prognostic of joys and wealth passing their zenith,
and warns you to care for your interests with renewed vigilance.

A sun shining through clouds, denotes that troubles and difficulties
are losing hold on you, and prosperity is nearing you.

If the sun appears weird, or in an eclipse, there will be stormy
and dangerous times, but these will eventually pass, leaving your
business and domestic affairs in better forms than before.

_Sunshade_.

To dream of seeing young girls carrying sunshades, foretells prosperity
and exquisite delights.

A broken one, foretells sickness and death to the young.

_Surgeon_.

To dream of a surgeon, denotes you are threatened by enemies who are close
to you in business.  For a young woman, this dream promises a serious illness
from which she will experience great inconvenience.

_Surgical Instruments_.

To see surgical instruments in a dream, foretells dissatisfaction will be felt
by you at the indiscreet manner a friend manifests toward you.

_Swallow_.

To dream of swallows, is a sign of peace and domestic harmony.

To see a wounded or dead one, signifies unavoidable sadness.

_Swamp_.[217]

To walk through swampy places in dreams, foretells that you will be
the object of adverse circumstances.  Your inheritance will be uncertain,
and you will undergo keen disappointments in your love matters.

To go through a swamp where you see clear water and green growths,
you will take hold on prosperity and singular pleasures, the obtaining
of which will be attended with danger and intriguing.


[217] See Marsh.

_Swan_.

To dream of seeing white swans floating upon placid waters,
foretells prosperous outlooks and delightful experiences.

To see a black swan, denotes illicit pleasure, if near clear water.

A dead swan, foretells satiety and discontentment

To see them flying, pleasant anticipations will be realized soon.

_Swearing_.

To dream of swearing, denotes some unpleasant obstructions in business.
A lover will have cause to suspect the faithfulness of his affianced
after this dream.

To dream that you are swearing before your family, denotes that disagreements
will soon be brought about by your unloyal conduct.

_Sweeping_.

To dream of sweeping, denotes that you will gain favor in the eyes
of your husband, and children will find pleasure in the home.

If you think the floors need sweeping, and you from some cause
neglect them, there will be distresses and bitter disappointments
awaiting you in the approaching days.

To servants, sweeping is a sign of disagreements and suspicion
of the intentions of others.

_Sweetheart_.[218]

To dream that your sweetheart is affable and of pleasing physique,
foretells that you will woo a woman who will prove a joy to your pride
and will bring you a good inheritance.  If she appears otherwise, you will
be discontented with your choice before the marriage vows are consummated.
To dream of her as being sick or in distress, denotes that sadness will
be intermixed with joy.

If you dream that your sweetheart is a corpse, you will have a long
period of doubt and unfavorable fortune.


[218] See Lover, Hugging, and Kissing.

_Sweet Oil_.

Sweet oil in dreams, implies considerate treatment will be withheld
from you in some unfortunate occurrence.

_Sweet Taste_.

To dream of any kind of a sweet taste in your mouth, denotes you
will be praised for your pleasing conversation and calm demeanor
in a time of commotion and distress.

To dream that you are trying to get rid of a sweet taste,
foretells that you will oppress and deride your friends,
and will incur their displeasure.

_Swelling_.

To dream that you see yourself swollen, denotes that you will amass fortune,
but your egotism will interfere with your enjoyment.

To see others swollen, foretells that advancement will meet
with envious obstructions.

Swimming.[219]

To dream of swimming, is an augury of success if you find
no discomfort in the act.  If you feel yourself going down,
much dissatisfaction will present itself to you.

For a young woman to dream that she is swimming with a girl friend
who is an artist in swimming, foretells that she will be loved
for her charming disposition, and her little love affairs will be
condoned by her friends.

To swim under water, foretells struggles and anxieties.


[219] See Diving and Bathing.

_Swiss Cheese_.

To dream of Swiss cheese, foretells that you will come into possession
of substantial property, and healthful amusements will be enjoyed.

_Switch_.

To dream of a switch, foretells changes and misfortune.

A broken switch, foretells disgrace and trouble.

To dream of a railroad switch, denotes that travel will cause
you much loss and inconvenience.

To dream of a switch, signifies you will meet discouragements
in momentous affairs.

_Sword_.

To dream that you wear a sword, indicates that you will fill
some public position with honor.

To have your sword taken from you, denotes your vanquishment in rivalry.

To see others bearing swords, foretells that altercations will be
attended with danger.

A broken sword, foretells despair.

_Sybil_.

To dream of a sybil, foretells that you will enjoy assignations
and other demoralizing pleasures.

_Symphony_.[220]

To dream of symphonies, heralds delightful occupations.


[220] See Music.

_Synagogue_.[221]

To dream of a synagogue, foretells that you have enemies
powerfully barricading your entrance into fortune's realms.
If you climb to the top on the outside, you will overcome
oppositions and be successful.

If you read the Hebrew inscription on a synagogue, you will meet disaster,
but will eventually rebuild your fortunes with renewed splendor.


[221] See Church.

_Syringe_.

To dream of a syringe, denotes that false alarm of the gravity
of a relative's condition will reach you.  To see a broken one,
foretells you are approaching a period of ill health or worry
over slight mistakes in business.



T.


``_And it was so, when Gideon heard the telling of the dream,
and the interpretation thereof, that he worshiped,
and returned into the host of Israel, and said, `Arise; for
the Lord hath delivered into your hand the host of Midian_.'
''--Judges VII., 15.

_Table_.

To dream of setting a table preparatory to a meal, foretells happy unions
and prosperous circumstances.

To see empty tables, signifies poverty or disagreements.

To clear away the table, denotes that pleasure will soon assume
the form of trouble and indifference.

To eat from a table without a cloth, foretells that you will be possessed
of an independent disposition, and the prosperity or conduct of others
will give you no concern.

To see a table walking or moving in some mysterious way,
foretells that dissatisfaction will soon enter your life,
and you will seek relief in change.

To dream of a soiled cloth on a table, denotes disobedience from servants
or children, and quarreling will invariably follow pleasure.

To see a broken table, is ominous of decaying fortune.

To see one standing or sitting on a table, foretells that to obtain
their desires they will be guilty of indiscretions.

To see or hear table-rapping or writing, denotes that you will undergo change
of feelings towards your friends, and your fortune will be threatened.
A loss from the depreciation of relatives or friends is indicated.

_Tacks_.

To dream of tacks, means to you many vacations and quarrels.

For a woman to drive one, foretells she will master unpleasant rivalry.

If she mashes her finger while driving it, she will be distressed
over unpleasant tasks

_Tadpole_.

To dream of tadpoles, foretells uncertain speculation will bring cause
for uneasiness in business.  For a young woman to see them in clear water,
foretells she will form a relation with a wealthy but immoral man.

_Tail_.

To dream of seeing only the tail of a beast, unusual annoyance is indicated
where pleasures seemed assured.

To cut off the tail of an animal, denotes that you will suffer misfortune
by your own carelessness.

To dream that you have the tail of a beast grown on you,
denotes that your evil ways will cause you untold distress,
and strange events will cause you perplexity.

_Tailor_.

To dream of a tailor, denotes that worries will arise on account
of some journey to be made.

To have a misunderstanding with one, shows that you will be disappointed
in the outcome of some scheme.

For one to take your measure, denotes that you will have
quarrels and disagreements.

_Talisman_.

To dream that you wear a talisman, implies you will have
pleasant companions and enjoy favors from the rich.
For a young woman to dream her lover gives her one, denotes she
will obtain her wishes concerning marriage.

_Talking_.

To dream of talking, denotes that you will soon hear of the sickness
of relatives, and there will be worries in your affairs.

To hear others talking loudly, foretells that you will be accused
of interfering in the affairs of others.  To think they are talking
about you, denotes that you are menaced with illness and disfavor.

_Tallow_.

To dream of tallow, forebodes that your possessions of love and wealth
will quickly vanish.

_Tambourine_.

To dream of a tambourine, signifies you will have enjoyment in some unusual
event which will soon take place.

_Tank_.

To dream of a tank, foretells you will be prosperous and satisfied beyond
your expectations.  To see a leaking tank, denotes loss in your affairs.

_Tannery_.

To dream of a tannery, denotes contagion and other illness.
Loss in trade is portended.

To dream that you are a tanner, denotes that you will have to engage in work
which is not to your taste, but there will be others dependent upon you.

To buy leather from a tannery, foretells that you will be successful
in your undertakings, but will not make many friends.

_Tape_.

To dream of tape, denotes your work will be wearisome and unprofitable.
For a woman to buy it, foretells she will find misfortune laying
oppression upon her.

_Tapestry_.

To dream of seeing rich tapestry, foretells that luxurious living
will be to your liking, and if the tapestries are not worn or ragged,
you will be able to gratify your inclinations.

If a young woman dreams that her rooms are hung with tapestry,
she will soon wed some one who is rich and above her in standing.

_Tapeworm_.

To dream you see a tapeworm, or have one, denotes disagreeable
prospects for health or for pleasure.

_Tar_.

If you see tar in dreams, it warns you against pitfalls and designs
of treacherous enemies.

To have tar on your hands or clothing, denotes sickness and grief.

_Tarantula_.

To see a tarantula in your dream, signifies enemies are about to overwhelm you
with loss.  To kill one, denotes you will be successful after much ill-luck.

_Target_.

To dream of a target, foretells you will have some affair
demanding your attention from other more pleasant ones.
For a young woman to think she is a target, denotes her reputation
is in danger through the envy of friendly associates.

_Tassels_.

To see tassels in a dream, denotes you will reach the height
of your desires and ambition.  For a young woman to lose them,
denotes she will undergo some unpleasant experience.

_Tattoo_.

To see your body appearing tattooed, foretells that some difficulty
will cause you to make a long and tedious absence from your home.

To see tattooes on others, foretells that strange loves will make
you an object of jealousy.

To dream you are a tattooist, is a sign that you will estrange yourself
from friends because of your fancy for some strange experience.

_Taxes_.

To dream that you pay your taxes, foretells you will
succeed in destroying evil influences rising around you.
If others pay them, you will be forced to ask aid of friends.
If you are unable to pay them, you will be unfortunate in
experiments you are making.

_Tea_.

To dream that you are brewing tea, foretells that you will be guilty
of indiscreet actions, and will feel deeply remorseful.

To see your friends drinking tea, and you with them, denotes that social
pleasures will pall on you, and you will seek to change your feelings
by serving others in their sorrows.

To see dregs in your tea, warns you of trouble in love,
and affairs of a social nature.

To spill tea, is a sign of domestic confusion and grief.

To find your tea chest empty, unfolds much disagreeable gossip and news.

To dream that you are thirsty for tea, denotes that you will be surprised
with uninvited guests.

_Teacups_.

To dream of teacups, foretells that affairs of enjoyment will be
attended by you.  For a woman to break or see them broken, omens her
pleasure and good fortune will be marred by a sudden trouble.
To drink wine from one, foretells fortune and pleasure will be
combined in the near future.

_Teakettle_.

To dream you see a teakettle, implies sudden news which will be likely
to distress you.  For a woman to pour sparkling, cold water from a teakettle,
she will have unexpected favor shown her.

_Tears_.

To dream that you are in tears, denotes that some affliction
will soon envelope you.

To see others shedding tears, foretells that your sorrows will affect
the happiness of others,

_Teasing_.

To find yourself teasing any person while dreaming, denotes that you will
be loved and sought after because of your cheerful and amiable manners.
Your business will be eventually successful.

To dream of being teased, denotes that you will win the love of merry
and well-to-do persons.

For a young woman to dream of being teased, foretells that she will
form a hasty attachment, but will not be successful in consummating
an early marriage.

_Teeth_.

An ordinary dream of teeth augurs an unpleasant contact with sickness,
or disquieting people.

If you dream that your teeth are loose, there will be failures
and gloomy tidings.

If the doctor pulls your tooth, you will have desperate illness, if not fatal;
it will be lingering.

To have them filled, you will recover lost valuables after much uneasiness.

To clean or wash your teeth, foretells that some great struggle
will be demanded of you in order to preserve your fortune.

To dream that you are having a set of teeth made, denotes that severe
crosses will fall upon you, and you will strive to throw them aside.

If you lose your teeth, you will have burdens which will crush your pride
and demolish your affairs.

To dream that you have your teeth knocked out, denotes sudden misfortune.
Either your business will suffer, or deaths or accidents will come
close to you.

To examine your teeth, warns you to be careful of your affairs,
as enemies are lurking near you.

If they appear decayed and snaggled, your business or health
will suffer from intense strains.

To dream of spitting out teeth, portends personal sickness,
or sickness in your immediate family.

Imperfect teeth is one of the worst dreams.  It is full of mishaps
for the dreamer.  A loss of estates, failure of persons to carry
out their plans and desires, bad health, depressed conditions
of the nervous system for even healthy persons.

For one tooth to fall out, foretells disagreeable news; if two,
it denotes unhappy states that the dreamer will be plunged
into from no carelessness on his part.  If three fall out,
sickness and accidents of a very serious nature will follow.

Seeing all the teeth drop out, death and famine usually will prevail.
If the teeth are decayed and you pull them out, the same, only yourself,
is prominent in the case.

To dream of tartar or any deposit falling off of the teeth and leaving them
sound and white, is a sign of temporary indisposition, which will pass,
leaving you wiser in regard to conduct, and you will find enjoyment
in the discharge of duty.

To admire your teeth for their whiteness and beauty, foretells that
pleasant occupations and much happiness will be experienced through
the fulfilment of wishes.

To dream that you pull one of your teeth and lose it,
and feeling within your mouth with your tongue for the cavity,
and failing to find any, and have a doctor for the same,
but to no effect, leaving the whole affair enveloped in mystery,
denotes that you are about to enter into some engagement which
does not exactly please you, and which you decide to ignore,
but will later take it up and secretly prosecute it to your own
disquieting satisfaction and under the suspicion of friends.

To dream that a dentist cleans your teeth perfectly,
and the next morning you find them rusty, foretells you will
believe your interest secure concerning some person or position,
but you will find that they have succumbed to the blandishments
of an artful man or woman.

_Telegram_.

To dream that you receive a telegram, denotes that you
will soon receive tidings of an unpleasant character.
Some friend is likely to misrepresent matters which are of much
concern to you.

To send a telegram is a sign that you will be estranged from some one holding
a place near you, or business will disappoint you.

If you are the operator sending these messages, you will be affected
by them only through the interest of others.

To see or be in a telegraph office, foretells unfortunate engagements.

_Telephone_.

To dream of a telephone, foretells you will meet strangers
who will harass and bewilder you in your affairs.
For a woman to dream of talking over one, denotes she will have
much jealous rivalry, but will overcome all evil influences.
If she cannot hear well in conversing over one, she is threatened
with evil gossip, and the loss of a lover.

_Telescope_.

To dream of a telescope, portends unfavorable seasons for love
and domestic affairs, and business will be changeable and uncertain.

To look at planets and stars through one, portends for you
journeys which will afford you much pleasure, but later cause
you much financial loss.

To see a broken telescope, or one not in use, signifies that matters
will go out of the ordinary with you, and trouble may be expected.

_Tempest_.[222]

To dream of tempests, denotes that you will have a siege of
calamitous trouble, and friends will treat you with indifference.


[222] See Storms and Cyclones.

_Temptation_.

To dream that you are surrounded by temptations, denotes that
you will be involved in some trouble with an envious person
who is trying to displace you in the confidence of friends.
If you resist them, you will be successful in some affair
in which you have much opposition.

_Tenant_.

For a landlord to see his tenant in a dream, denotes he will have
business trouble and vexation.  To imagine you are a tenant,
foretells you will suffer loss in experiments of a business character.
If a tenant pays you money, you will be successful in some engagements.

_Tenpins_.

If you dream at playing at tenpins, you will doubtless soon
engage in some affair which will bring discredit upon your name,
and you will lose your money and true friendship.

To see others engaged in this dream, foretells that you will find
pleasure in frivolous people and likely lose employment.

For a young woman to play a successful game of tenpins, is an omen
of light pleasures, but sorrow will attend her later.

_Tent_.

To dream of being in a tent, foretells a change in your affairs.

To see a number of tents, denotes journeys with unpleasant companions.

If the tents are torn or otherwise dilapidated, there will be
trouble for you.

_Terror_.

To dream that you feel terror at any object or happening,
denotes that disappointments and loss will envelope you.

To see others in terror, means that unhappiness of friends
will seriously affect you.

_Text_.

To dream of hearing a minister reading his text, denotes that quarrels
will lead to separation with some friend.

To dream that you are in a dispute about a text, foretells unfortunate
adventures for you.

If you try to recall a text, you will meet with unexpected difficulties.

If you are repeating and pondering over one, you will have great obstacles
to overcome if you gain your desires.

_Thatch_.

To dream that you thatch a roof with any quickly, perishable material,
denotes that sorrow and discomfort will surround you.

If you find that a roof which you have thatched with straw is leaking,
there will be threatenings of danger, but by your rightly directed energy
they may be averted.

_Thaw_.

To dream of seeing ice thawing, foretells that some affair which has caused
you much worry will soon give you profit and pleasure.

To see the ground thawing after a long freeze,
foretells prosperous circumstances.

_Theater_.

To dream of being at a theater, denotes that you will have much
pleasure in the company of new friends.  Your affairs will be
satisfactory after this dream.  If you are one of the players,
your pleasures will be of short duration.

If you attend a vaudeville theater, you are in danger of losing
property through silly pleasures.  If it is a grand opera,
you will succeed in you wishes and aspirations.

If you applaud and laugh at a theater, you will sacrifice duty
to the gratification of fancy.

To dream of trying to escape from one during a fire or other excitement,
foretells that you will engage in some enterprise, which will be hazardous.

_Thermometer_.

To dream of looking at a thermometer, denotes unsatisfactory business,
and disagreements in the home.

To see a broken one, foreshadows illness.  If the mercury seems
to be falling, your affairs will assume a distressing shape.
If it is rising, you will be able to throw off bad conditions
in your business.

_Thief_.[223]

To dream of being a thief and that you are pursued by officers,
is a sign that you will meet reverses in business, and your social
relations will be unpleasant.

If you pursue or capture a thief, you will overcome your enemies.


[223] See Stealing.

_Thigh_.

To dream of seeing your thigh smooth and white, denotes unusual
good luck and pleasure.

To see wounded thighs, foretells illness and treachery.

For a young woman to admire her thigh, signifies willingness
to engage in adventures, and she should heed this as a warning
to be careful of her conduct.

_Thimble_.

If you use a thimble in your dreams, you will have many others
to please besides yourself.  If a woman, you will have your own
position to make.

To lose one, foretells poverty and trouble.  To see an old or broken one,
denotes that you are about to act unwisely in some momentous affair.

To receive or buy a new thimble, portends new associations in which you
will find contentment.

To dream that you use an open end thimble, but find that it is closed,
denotes that you will have trouble, but friends will aid you in escaping
its disastrous consequences.

_Thirst_.

To dream of being thirsty, shows that you are aspiring to things beyond
your present reach; but if your thirst is quenched with pleasing drinks,
you will obtain your wishes.

To see others thirsty and drinking to slake it, you will enjoy
many favors at the hands of wealthy people.

_Thorns_.

To dream of thorns, is an omen of dissatisfaction, and evil will surround
every effort to advancement.

If the thorns are hidden beneath green foliage, you prosperity
will be interfered with by secret enemies.

_Thread_.[224]

To dream of thread, denotes that your fortune lies beyond intricate paths.

To see broken threads, you will suffer loss through the
faithlessness of friends.


[224] See Spools.

_Threshing_.

To dream of threshing grain, denotes great advancement in business
and happiness among families.  But if there is an abundance of straw
and little grain, unsuccessful enterprises will be undertaken.

To break down or have an accident while threshing, you will have some
great sorrow in the midst of prosperity.

_Throat_.

To dream of seeing a well-developed and graceful throat,
portends a rise in position.

If you feel that your throat is sore, you will be deceived in your estimation
of a friend, and will have anxiety over the discovery.

_Throne_.

If you dream of sitting on a throne, you will rapidly rise
to favor and fortune.

To descend from one, there is much disappointment for you.

To see others on a throne, you will succeed to wealth through
the favor of others.

_Thumb_.

To dream of seeing a thumb, foretells that you will be the favorite
of artful persons and uncertain fortune.

If you are suffering from a sore thumb, you will lose
in business, and your companions will prove disagreeable.
To dream that you have no thumb, implies destitution and loneliness.
If it seems unnaturally small, you will enjoy pleasure for a time.
If abnormally large, your success will be rapid and brilliant.

A soiled thumb indicates gratification of loose desires.
If the thumb has a very long nail, you are liable to fall
into evil through seeking strange pleasures.

_Thunder_.

To dream of hearing thunder, foretells you will soon be threatened
with reverses in your business.

To be in a thunder shower, denotes trouble and grief are close to you.

To hear the terrific peals of thunder, which make the earth quake,
portends great loss and disappointment.

_Tickle_.

To dream of being tickled, denotes insistent worries and illness.

If you tickle others, you will throw away much enjoyment through
weakness and folly.

_Ticks_.

To dream you see ticks crawling on your flesh, is a sign of impoverished
circumstances and ill health.  Hasty journeys to sick beds may be made.

To mash a tick on you, denotes that you will be annoyed
by treacherous enemies.

To see in your dreams large ticks on stock, enemies are endeavoring
to get possession of your property by foul means.

_Tiger_.

To dream of a tiger advancing towards you, you will be tormented and
persecuted by enemies.  If it attacks you, failure will bury you in gloom.
If you succeed in warding it off, or killing it, you will be extremely
successful in all your undertakings.

To see one running away from you, is a sign that you will overcome opposition,
and rise to high positions.

To see them in cages, foretells that you will foil your adversaries.

To see rugs of tiger skins, denotes that you are in the way to enjoy
luxurious ease and pleasure.

_Till_.

To dream of seeing money and valuables in a till, foretells coming success.
Your love affairs will be exceedingly favorable.  An empty one,
denotes disappointed expectations.

_Timber_.[225]

To see timber in your dreams, is an augury of prosperous times
and peaceful surroundings.

If the timber appears dead, there are great disappointments for you.


[225] See Forest.

_Tipsy_.

To dream that you are tipsy, denotes that you will cultivate
a jovial disposition, and the cares of life will make no serious
inroads into your conscience.

To see others tipsy, shows that you are careless as to the demeanor
of your associates.

_Toad_.

To dream of toads, signifies unfortunate adventures.
If a woman, your good name is threatened with scandal.

To kill a toad, foretells that your judgment will be harshly criticised.

To put your hands on them, you will be instrumental in causing the downfall
of a friend.

_Tobacco_.

To dream of tobacco, denotes success in business affairs,
but poor returns in love.

To use it, warns you against enemies and extravagance.

To see it growing, foretells successful enterprises.
To see it dry in the leaf, ensures good crops to farmers,
and consequent gain to tradesmen.

To smoke tobacco, denotes amiable friendships.

_Tocsin_.

To dream of hearing a tocsin sounded, augurs a strife from which you
will come victorious.  For a woman, this is a warning of separation
from her husband or lover.

_Toddy_.

To dream of taking a toddy, foretells interesting events will soon change
your plan of living.

_Tomatoes_.

To dream of eating tomatoes, signals the approach of good health.
To see them growing, denotes domestic enjoyment and happiness.

For a young woman to see ripe ones, foretells her happiness
in the married state.

_Tomb_.

To dream of seeing tombs, denotes sadness and disappointments in business.

Dilapidated tombs omens death or desperate illness.

To dream of seeing your own tomb, portends your individual
sickness or disappointments.

To read the inscription on tombs, foretells unpleasant duties.

_Tongue_.

To dream of seeing your own tongue, denotes that you will be looked
upon with disfavor by your acquaintances.

To see the tongue of another, foretells that scandal will villify you.

To dream that your tongue is affected in any way, denotes that your
carelessness in talking will get you into trouble.

_Toothless_.

To dream that you are toothless, denotes your inability to advance
your interests, and ill health will cast goom{sic} over your prospects.

To see others toothless, foretells that enemies are trying in vain
to calumniate you.

_Tooth-picks_.

To dream of tooth-picks, foretells that small anxieties, and spites
will harass you unnecessarily if you give them your attention.

If you use one, you will be a party to a friend's injury.

_Topaz_.

To see topaz in a dream, signifies Fortune will be liberal
in her favors, and you will have very pleasing companions.
For a woman to lose topaz ornaments, foretells she will
be injured by jealous friends who court her position.
To receive one from another beside a relative, foretells an
interesting love affair will occupy her attention.

_Tops_.

To dream of a top, denotes that you will be involved
in frivolous difficulties.

To see one spinning, foretells that you will waste your means
in childish pleasures.

To see a top, foretells indiscriminate friendships will involve
you in difficulty.

_Torch_.[226]

To dream of seeing torches, foretells pleasant amusement
and favorable business.

To carry a torch, denotes success in love making or intricate affairs.
For one to go out, denotes failure and distress.


[226] See Lantern and Lamp.

_Tornado_.[227]

If you dream that you are in a tornado, you will be filled with
disappointment and perplexity over the miscarriage of studied
plans for swift attainment of fortune.


[227] See Hurricane.

_Torrent_.

To dream that you are looking upon a rushing torrent, denotes that you
will have unusual trouble and anxiety.

_Torture_.

To dream of being tortured, denotes that you will undergo disappointment
and grief through the machination of false friends.

If you are torturing others, you will fail to carry out well-laid
plans for increasing your fortune.

If you are trying to alleviate the torture of others, you will succeed
after a struggle in business and love.

_Tourist_.

To dream that you are a tourist, denotes that you will engage in some
pleasurable affair which will take you away from your usual residence.

To see tourists, indicates brisk but unsettled business and anxiety in love.

_Tower_.[228]

To dream of seeing a tower, denotes that you will aspire to high elevations.
If you climb one, you will succeed in your wishes, but if the tower crumbles
as you descend, you will be disappointed in your hopes.


[228] See Ladder.

_Toys_.

To see toys in dreams, foretells family joys, if whole and new,
but if broken, death will rend your heart with sorrow.

To see children at play with toys, marriage of a happy nature is indicated.

To give away toys in your dreams, foretells you will be ignored
in a social way by your acquaintances.

_Trade_.

To dream of trading, denotes fair success in your enterprise.
If you fail, trouble and annoyances will overtake you.

_Tragedy_.

To dream of a tragedy, foretells misunderstandings
and grievious disappointments.

To dream that you are implicated in a tragedy, portends that a calamity
will plunge you into sorrow and peril.

_Train_.

To see a train of cars moving in your dreams, you will soon have cause
to make a journey.

To be on a train and it appears to move smoothly along, though there
is no track, denotes that you will be much worried over some affair
which will eventually prove a source of profit to you.

To see freight trains in your dreams, is an omen of changes which will tend
to your elevation.

To find yourself, in a dream, on top of a sleeping car, denotes you will
make a journey with an unpleasant companion, with whom you will spend
money and time that could be used in a more profitable and congenial way,
and whom you will seek to avoid.

_Traitor_.

To see a traitor in your dream, foretells you will have enemies working
to despoil you.  If some one calls you one, or if you imagine yourself one,
there will be unfavorable prospects of pleasure for you.

_Transfiguration_.

To dream of the transfiguration, foretells that your faith in man's
own nearness to God will raise you above trifling opinions,
and elevate you to a worthy position, in which capacity you will
be able to promote the well being of the ignorant and persecuted.

To see yourself transfigured, you will stand high in the esteem
of honest and prominent men.

_Trap_.

To dream of setting a trap, denotes that you will use intrigue to carry
out your designs

If you are caught in a trap, you will be outwitted by your opponents.

If you catch game in a trap, you will flourish in whatever vocation
you may choose.

To see an empty trap, there will be misfortune in the immediate future.

An old or broken trap, denotes failure in business, and sickness
in your family may follow.

_Traveling_.[229]

To dream of traveling, signifies profit and pleasure combined.
To dream of traveling through rough unknown places, portends
dangerous enemies, and perhaps sickness.  Over bare or rocky steeps,
signifies apparent gain, but loss and disappointment will swiftly follow.
If the hills or mountains are fertile and green, you will be eminently
prosperous and happy.

To dream you travel alone in a car, denotes you may possibly
make an eventful journey, and affairs will be worrying.
To travel in a crowded car, foretells fortunate adventures,
and new and entertaining companions.


[229] See Journey.

_Tray_.

To see trays in your dream, denotes your wealth will be foolishly
wasted, and surprises of unpleasant nature will shock you.
If the trays seem to be filled with valuables, surprises will come
in the shape of good fortune.

_Treasures_.

To dream that you find treasures, denotes that you will be greatly
aided in your pursuit of fortune by some unexpected generosity.

If you lose treasures, bad luck in business and the inconstancy
of friends is foretold.

_Trees_.[230]

To dream of trees in new foliage, foretells a happy consummation of hopes
and desires.  Dead trees signal sorrow and loss.

To climb a tree is a sign of swift elevation and preferment.

To cut one down, or pull it up by the roots, denotes that you
will waste your energies and wealth foolishly.

To see green tress newly felled, portends unhappiness coming unexpectedly
upon scenes of enjoyment, or prosperity.


[230] See Forest.

_Trenches_.[231]

To see trenches in dreams, warns you of distant treachery.
You will sustain loss if not careful in undertaking new enterprises,
or associating with strangers.

To see filled trenches, denotes many anxieties are gathering around you.


[231] See Ditch.

_Triangle_.

To dream of a triangle, foretells separation from friends,
and love affairs will terminate in disagreements.

_Tripe_.

To see tripe in a dream, means sickness and danger.

To eat tripe, denotes that you will be disappointed in some serious matter.

_Triplets_.

To dream of seeing triplets, foretells success in affairs
where failure was feared.

For a man to dream that his wife has them, signifies a pleasant
termination to some affair which has been long in dispute.

To hear newly-born triplets crying, signifies disagreements
which will be hastily reconciled to your pleasure.

For a young woman to dream that she has triplets, denotes that she will suffer
loss and disappointment in love, but will succeed to wealth.

_Trophy_.

To see trophies in a dream, signifies some pleasure or fortune
will come to you through the endeavors of mere acquaintances.
For a woman to give away a trophy, implies doubtful
pleasures and fortune.

_Trousers_.

To dream of trousers, foretells that you will be tempted
to dishonorable deeds.

If you put them on wrong side out, you will find that a fascination
is fastening its hold upon you.

_Trout_.

To dream of seeing trout, is significant of growing prosperity.
To eat some, denotes that you will be happily conditioned.

To catch one with a hook, foretells assured pleasure and competence.
If it falls back into the water, you will have a short season of happiness.

To catch them with a seine, is a sign of unparalleled prosperity.

To see them in muddy water shows that your success in love will bring
you to grief and disappointments.

_Trowel_.

To dream of a trowel, denotes you will experience reaction
in unfavorable business, and will vanquish poverty.  To see one
rusty or broken, unavoidable ill luck is fast approaching you.

_Trumpet_.

To dream of a trumpet, denotes that something of unusual interest
is about to befall you.

To blow a trumpet, signifies that you will gain your wishes.

_Trunk_.

To dream of trunks, foretells journeys and ill luck.  To pack your trunk,
denotes that you will soon go on a pleasant trip.

To see the contents of a trunk thrown about in disorder, foretells quarrels,
and a hasty journey from which only dissatisfaction will accrue.

Empty trunks foretell disappointment in love and marriage.

For a drummer to check his trunk, is an omen of advancement and comfort.
If he finds that his trunk is too small for his wares, he will soon
hear of his promotion, and his desires will reach gratification.
For a young woman to dream that she tries to unlock her trunk
and can't, signifies that she will make an effort to win some
wealthy person, but by a misadventure she will lose her chance.
If she fails to lock her trunk, she will be disappointed in making
a desired trip.

_Truss_.

To see a truss in your dream, your ill health and unfortunate
business engagements are predicted.

_Trusts_.

To dream of trusts, foretells indifferent success in trade or law.

If you imagine you are a member of a trust, you will be successful
in designs of a speculative nature.

_Tub_.

To dream of seeing a tub full of water, denotes domestic contentment.
An empty tub proclaims unhappiness and waning of fortune.

A broken tub, foretells family disagreements and quarrels.

_Tumble_.

To dream that you tumble off of any thing, denotes that you are given
to carelessness, and should strive to be prompt with your affairs.

To see others tumbliing,{sic} is a sign that you will profit
by the negligence of others.

_Tunnel_.

To dream of going through a tunnel is bad for those in business
and in love.

To see a train coming towards you while in a tunnel, foretells ill health
and change in occupation.

To pass through a tunnel in a car, denotes unsatisfactory business,
and much unpleasant and expensive travel.

To see a tunnel caving in, portends failure and malignant enemies.

To look into one, denotes that you will soon be compelled to face
a desperate issue.

_Turf_.

To dream of a racing turf, signifies that you will have pleasure
and wealth at your command, but your morals will be questioned
by your most intimate friends.

To see a green turf, indicates that interesting affairs will
hold your attention.

_Turkey_.

To dream of seeing turkeys, signifies abundant gain in business,
and favorable crops to the farmer.

To see them dressed for the market, denotes improvement in your affairs.

To see them sick, or dead, foretells that stringent circumstances
will cause your pride to suffer.

To dream you eat turkey, foretells some joyful occasion approaching.

To see them flying, denotes a rapid transit from obscurity to prominence.
To shoot them as game, is a sign that you will unscrupulously amass wealth.

_Turkish Baths_.

To dream of taking a Turkish bath, foretells that you will seek health far
from your home and friends, but you will have much pleasurable enjoyment

To see others take a Turkish bath, signifies that pleasant companions
will occupy your attention.

_Turnips_.

To see turnips growing, denotes that your prospects will brighten,
and that you will be much elated over your success.

To eat them is a sign of ill health.  To pull them up, denotes that you
will improve your opportunities and your fortune thereby.

To eat turnip greens, is a sign of bitter disappointment.
Turnip seed is a sign of future advancement.

For a young woman to sow turnip seed, foretells that she will inherit
good property, and win a handsome husband.

_Turpentine_.

To dream of turpentine, foretells your near future holds unprofitable
and discouraging engagements.  For a woman to dream that she binds
turpentine to the wound of another, shows she will gain friendships
and favor through her benevolent acts.

_Turquoise_.

To dream of a torquoise,{sic} foretells you are soon to realize
some desire which will greatly please your relatives.  For a woman
to have one stolen, foretells she will meet with crosses in love.
If she comes by it dishonestly, she must suffer for yielding to hasty
susceptibility in love.

_Turtle_.

To dream of seeing turtles, signifies that an unusual incident will cause
you enjoyment, and improve your business conditions.

To drink turtle soup, denotes that you will find pleasure
in compromising intrigue.

_Tweezers_.

To see tweezers in a dream, denotes uncomfortable situations will fill
you with discontent, and your companions will abuse you.

_Twine_.[232]

To see twine in your dream, warns you that your business is assuming
complications which will be hard to overcome.


[232] See Thread.

_Twins_.

To dream of seeing twins, foretells security in business,
and faithful and loving contentment in the home.

If they are sickly, it signifies that you will have disappointment and grief.

_Type_.

To see type in a dream, portends unpleasant transactions with friends.
For a woman to clean type, foretells she will make fortunate speculations
which will bring love and fortune.

_Typhoid_.

To dream that you are affected with this malady, is a warning
to beware of enemies, and look well to your health.

If you dream that there is an epidemic of typhoid, there will be depressions
in business, and usual good health will undergo disagreeable changes.



U.

``_And Solomon awoke; and, behold, it was a dream_.''--
First Kings, III., 15.

_Ugly_.

To dream that you are ugly, denotes that you will have a difficulty
with your sweetheart, and your prospects will assume a depressed shade.

If a young woman thinks herself ugly, she will conduct herself
offensively toward her lover, which will probably cause a break
in their pleasant associations.

_Ulcer_.

To see an ulcer in your dream, signifies loss of friends and removal
from loved ones.  Affairs will remain unsatisfactory.

To dream that you have ulcers, denotes that you will become unpopular
with your friends by giving yourself up to foolish pleasures.

_Umbrella_.

To dream of carrying an umbrella, denotes that trouble and annoyances
will beset you.

To see others carrying them, foretells that you will be appealed
to for aid by charity.

To borrow one, you will have a misunderstanding, perhaps, with a warm friend.

To lend one, portends injury from false friends.  To lose one,
denotes trouble with some one who holds your confidence.

To see one torn to pieces, or broken, foretells that you will
be misrepresented and maligned.

To carry a leaky one, denotes that pain and displeasure will be felt by you
towards your sweetheart or companions.

To carry a new umbrella over you in a clear shower, or sunshine,
omens exquisite pleasure and prosperity.

_Uncle_.

If you see your uncle in a dream, you will have news of a sad character soon.

To dream you see your uncle prostrated in mind, and repeatedly
have this dream, you will have trouble with your relations
which will result in estrangement, at least for a time.

To see your uncle dead, denotes that you have formidable enemies.

To have a misunderstanding with your uncle, denotes

that your family relations will be unpleasant, and illness
will be continually present.

_Underground_.[233]

To dream of being in an underground habitation, you are in danger
of losing reputation and fortune.

To dream of riding on an underground railway, foretells that you
will engage in some peculiar speculation which will contribute
to your distress and anxiety.


[233] See Cars, etc.

_Undress_.

To dream that you are undressing, foretells, scandalous gossip
will overshadow you.

For a woman to dream that she sees the ruler of her country undressed,
signifies sadness will overtake anticipated pleasures.
She will suffer pain through the apprehension of evil to those
dear to her.

To see others undressed, is an omen of stolen pleasures,
which will rebound with grief.

_Unfortunate_.

To dream that you are unfortunate, is significant of loss to yourself,
and trouble for others.

_Uniform_.

To see a uniform in your dream, denotes that you will have influential
friends to aid you in obtaining your desires.

For a young woman to dream that she wears a uniform,
foretells that she will luckily confer her favors upon
a man who appreciated them, and returns love for passion.
If she discards it, she will be in danger of public scandal
by her notorious love for adventure.

To see people arrayed in strange uniforms, foretells the disruption
of friendly relations with some other Power by your own government.
This may also apply to families or friends.  To see a friend
or relative looking sad while dressed in uniform, or as a soldier,
predicts ill fortune or continued absence.

_United States Mail Box_.

To see a United States mail box, in a dream, denotes that you
are about to enter into transactions which will be claimed
to be illegal.

To put a letter in one, denotes you will be held responsible
for some irregularity of another.

_Unknown_.[234]

To dream of meeting unknown persons, foretells change for good,
or bad as the person is good looking, or ugly, or deformed.

To feel that you are unknown, denotes that strange things will cast
a shadow of ill luck over you.


[234] See Mystery.

_Urgent_.

To dream that you are supporting an urgent petition, is a sign that you
will engage in some affair which will need fine financiering to carry
it through successfully.

_Urinal_.

To dream of a urinal, disorder will predominate in your home.

_Urine_.

To dream of seeing urine, denotes ill health will make you disagreeable
and unpleasant with your friends.

To dream that you are urinating, is an omen of bad luck,
and trying seasons to love.

_Urn_.

To dream of an urn, foretells you will prosper in some respects,
and in others disfavor will be apparent.  To see broken urns,
unhappiness will confront you.

_Usurer_.

To find yourself a usurer in your dreams, foretells that you will
be treated with coldness by your associates, and your business
will decline to your consternation.

If others are usurers, you will discard some former friend
on account of treachery.

_Usurper_.

To dream that you are a usurper, foretells you will have trouble
in establishing a good title to property.

If others are trying to usurp your rights, there will be a struggle
between you and your competitors, but you will eventually win.

For a young woman to have this dream, she will be a party to a spicy rivalry,
in which she will win.

