
CHAPTER XXIV.

RECREATIONS.


_Walking._

It is well to bear constantly in mind that all exercise, even walking
on level ground, is objectionable in clothing that compresses the
body; and as exercise is the law of the development of muscle, the
only safe thing to do is so to dress that every muscle has free and
unrestrained motion. Walking to be beneficial should be out of doors,
with some pleasant motive, and taken with some degree of energy. The
length of the walk should be proportional to the strength of the
girl--short at first, and increasing as strength increases. The erect
attitude should be maintained, and the walking not prolonged to
exhaustion.

Walking slowly home from school, laden with books and intent on
conversation with others, will not fulfill the demands of walking for
exercise. It makes no demand on breathing power, does not develop
depth of chest or strength of limb.


_Running._

This is an admirable exercise if the dress be suitable. Long skirts
are an impediment. Running on the toes develops the calf of the leg.

The swift motion causes deep breathing, which expands the chest. If
violent or long-continued, it may make too urgent a demand on the
heart and lungs, and so be detrimental. The counsel of a physician is
safest for those whose heart and lungs are weak.


_Riding._

Horseback riding is a vigorous exercise, which would be especially
beneficial were it not for the cramped position women are forced by
custom to assume. It cannot be recommended to those who have a
tendency to lateral curvature of the spine or weak back, or prolapsed
internal organs. Such girls should by proper care be put into a better
physical condition before attempting to ride. Harvey advises learning
to ride on either side of the horse, so as to bring opposite sets of
muscles into play, and counteract the curvature which physicians who
have the opportunity to observe say is produced by riding. That being
true, why not adopt the sensible fashion of riding on both sides of
the horse at once, as men do? I saw a young lady so mounted the other
day, and the sight was far more agreeable than the twisted attitude
compelled by the side-saddle. Medical men also assert that riding
tends to produce round shoulders, and as the greatest muscular strain
comes on the back, it is not helpful to weak backs.


_Skating._

Skating is a fine exercise. It quickens the circulation and the
respiration, aids digestion, exercises a great number of muscles, both
of limbs and trunk of body, strengthens the ankles, and incidentally
the nerves. Evils are to be found in wrong habits of dressing, the
tendency to overdo through the fascination of the sport, the danger of
taking cold by carelessly sitting down to rest when heated, or driving
home after being warmed up by the severe exertion. A girl of good
judgment, properly clothed, ought to be benefited by this charming
out-door sport.

It should be begun very gradually at the opening of the skating
season, and not undertaken if the internal organs are prolapsed.


_Rowing._

Rowing is an exercise that develops the upper back and back of
shoulders, and therefore needs to be counteracted by exercise that
calls into play the muscles of the front of the chest.


_Cycling._

The dangers of cycling arise principally from lack of judgment. The
temptation to overdo is very great, and injury is done in attempts to
ride longer, farther and faster than the strength will safely allow.
The whole dress should be so arranged as to give perfect freedom of
movement, the skirt short enough to clear the dangerous part of the
mechanism, the saddle adjusted to the individual both in its make and
height, and the girl be taught to sit properly and to adjust her
weight so that the pressure will not be undue upon the perineum.
Rectal and other local irritations are produced by the pressure of the
whole weight resting on the saddle.

The position should not be absolutely erect, but leaning _slightly_
forward, so as to allow the weight to be distributed between the
handle-bars, the pedal, and the saddle. This slightly inclined
attitude also maintains the proper and harmonious relation of the
internal organs, so that the bowels do not crowd down on the pelvic
organs.

If the girl is taught to sit on the machine properly, to distribute
her weight, to sit on the large gluteal muscles, and not on the
perineum, to use judgment in the amount of exercise taken at a time,
there is no reason why a girl in a normal condition of health should
not be benefited.

There may be particular reasons why some girls should not undertake to
ride, and these can be determined by the physician.


_Tennis._

This is a game that demands great activity, consequently there is
especial need of entire freedom of movement. All constrictions of
clothing are especially injurious.

It is claimed by some that, being essentially a one-sided exercise,
there is a possibility, if unwisely indulged in, that it may produce
injurious results, especially to the spine.


_Swimming._

Swimming is not only a valuable exercise, but it really conduces to
the safety of life in these days of constant boat travel, and there
are no adequate reasons why girls should not learn. The younger they
begin, the more readily will they become expert. It is not wise to
indulge in this exercise while menstruating, nor immediately after
eating.


_Skipping._

There is some prejudice against this form of exercise from the fact
that it can be overdone, and also from the popular idea that it is
injurious to girls to jump.

If they are properly dressed, and their muscles are gradually
developed, and they use good common sense as to amount, there are
practically no dangers in skipping. It is admirably adapted to
strengthen a great variety of muscles, as those of the legs, back,
abdomen, and neck. It strengthens the knees and the arches of the
feet, thereby tending to overcome flat foot. It strengthens weak
backs, increases circulation and respiration and promotes digestion,
and, if practised out of doors, is one of the most perfect forms of
exercise. Of course the judgment dictates that when the pelvic organs
are heavy with the menstrual congestion it would not be advisable.


_Dancing._

Dancing, in itself considered, is a pleasant and beneficial exercise.
It develops grace and muscular strength, increases circulation and
respiration, and is cheering because of rhythm. One wishes that it
could be unqualifiedly commended. But when we take into account the
late hours, the heated rooms, the promiscuous company, the late
unwholesome suppers, the improper dress, the dangers of taking cold,
the immodest freedom of the round dance, and the not infrequent evils
resulting therefrom, it would seem unwise to commend an exercise so
surrounded by objectionable concomitants. It is observed that young
church members who become interested in the dance soon lose all their
interest in church work.

If dancing could be conducted in the daytime, out of doors, among
well-known home friends and companions, in proper dress, and with _no
round dances_, there would be much to commend, and little to condemn.


_Card-playing._

I can find little to say in favor of this form of amusement. It
contains no exercise for the body. It continues the cramped attitudes
to which most people are condemned during the day.

It certainly contributes nothing to the higher forms of enjoyment. It
stimulates emulations, which St. Paul enumerates among things to be
avoided; it is the accompaniment of gambling and low society; and,
while we must admit that a pack of cards in itself is not evil, yet it
can be and often is made most detrimental to the best interests of
morality and righteousness.

The young woman who respects her own intellectual and moral powers
will see little charm in manipulating cards in a way to gain a
momentary success over another and perhaps arousing unkind feelings,
it may be even passions, that may culminate in bloodshed.


_Theatre-going._

It is natural that we should enjoy pictorial representation of human
life with living actors and audible words; and, understanding this,
many good people have had the hope that the stage might be purified
and made a teacher of morals. Certainly valuable lessons of life might
be most strongly presented in this concrete form, and thus appeal with
wonderful power to the young and inexperienced. But that it might be
so used does not insure that it will be, and observation shows us that
it is not.

The modern play concerns itself principally with a delineation of
those phases of life which we condemn when they become reality, and
the teaching power of the stage becomes a lesson in wrongdoing which
to the young and inexperienced is potent in its suggestiveness.

The costumes of actresses are often immodest, and many of these women
are immoral in character. It would not be just to condemn all actors
with the sweeping assertion of immorality, but all will admit that the
temptations are great, and that great moral force is needed to resist
the influences that lead towards wrong.

That many of our great actors will not permit their children to become
actors, or, in some cases, even to enter the theatre as a witness of
its performances, speaks strongly on the matter.

In the consideration of this subject the girl may safely decide that
she will not be a permanent loser if she is not a frequenter of the
theatre. It is safer to keep the mind pure and untainted from all
pictures of sin, more especially if they are made attractive by the
glamour of jewels and silken attire, of music, dancing, and lifelike
portrayal.




PART III.

LOVE; HEREDITY; ENGAGEMENTS.



