
CHAPTER XXIX.

EFFECTS OF IMMORALITY ON THE RACE.


There is another influence at work in causing race degeneracy
concerning which the majority of girls are ignorant, and that is
immorality. The prevalent idea that young men must "sow their wild
oats" is accepted by many young women as true, and they think if the
lover reforms before marriage and remains true to them thereafter,
that is all they can reasonably demand. They will not make such
excuses for themselves for lapses from virtue, but they imbibe the
idea that men are not to be held to an absolute standard of purity,
and so think it delicate to shut their eyes to the derelictions of
young men. This chapter of human life is a sorrowful one to read, but
to heed its warnings would save many a girl from sorrow, many a wife
from heartache.

The law of God is not a double law, holding woman to the most rigid
code of a "thou shalt not" and allowing men the liberty of a "thou
mayest."

The penalty inflicted for the violation of moral law is one of the
most severe, both in its effects upon the individual transgressor and
upon his descendants. The most dreadful scourge of physical disease,
as well as moral degeneracy, follows an impure life. This disease,
known as syphilis, is practically incurable. It may temporarily
disappear, only to reappear in some other form later in life; and even
after all signs have become quiescent in the man, they may reappear in
his children in some form of transmission. Even one lapse from virtue
is enough to taint the young man with this dreadful poison, which may
be in after years communicated to his innocent wife or transmitted to
his children.

Dr. Guernsey says: "I do not overdraw the picture when I declare that
millions of human beings die annually from the effects of poison
contracted in this way, in some form of suffering or other; for, by
insinuating its effects into and poisoning the whole man, it
complicates various disorders and renders them incurable. This
horrible infection sometimes becomes engrafted upon other acute
diseases, when lingering disorders follow, causing years of misery,
and only terminating in death. Sometimes the poison attacks the
throat, causing most destructive alterations therein. Sometimes it
seizes upon the nasal bones, resulting in their entire destruction and
an awful disfigurement of the face. Sometimes it ultimates itself in
the ulceration and destruction of other osseous tissues in different
portions of the body. Living examples of these facts are too
frequently witnessed in the streets of any large city. Young men
marrying with the slightest taint of this poison in the blood will
surely transmit the disease to their children. Thousands of abortions
transpire every year from this cause alone, the poison being so
destructive as to kill the child _in utero_, before it is matured for
birth; and even if the child be born alive, it is liable to break down
with most loathsome disorders of some kind and die during dentition;
the few that survive this period are short-lived, and are unhealthy so
long as they do live. The first unchaste connection of a man with a
woman may be attended with a contamination entailing upon him a life
of suffering, and even death itself. Almost imperceptible in its
origin, it corrupts the whole body, makes the very air offensive to
surrounding friends, and lays multitudes literally to rot in the
grave. It commences in one part of the body, and usually, in more or
less degree, extends to the whole system, and is said by most eminent
physicians to be a morbid poison, having the power of extending itself
to every part of the body into which it is infused, and to other
persons with whom it in any way comes in contact, so that even its
moisture, communicated by linen or otherwise, may corrupt those who
unfortunately touch it."

If girls were aware of all this they would not only be careful how
they marry immoral men, but they would shrink from personal contact
with them as from a viper. Not one, but many girls who have held
somewhat lax ideas concerning the propriety of allowing young men to
be familiar have reaped the result in a contamination merely through
the touch of the lips. To-day a young woman in good social standing is
a sufferer from this cause. She was acquainted with a young man of
respectable family, but immoral life. His gaiety had a fascination for
her, and his reputed wildness only added to the charm. On one evening,
as he escorted her home, and took leave of her on the doorstep, she
allowed him to kiss her. It chanced that at the time she had a small
sore on her lip. The poisonous touch of his lips conveyed the
infection through this slight abrasion, and she became tainted with
the syphilitic virus, and to-day bears the loathsome disfigurement in
consequence. I do not need to multiply such cases. You can be warned
by one as well as by a hundred.[2]

A young woman of pure life married a man whose reputation was bad, but
whose social position was high. To-day she is suffering from the
horrible disease which he communicated to her, and her children have
died or are betraying to the world in their very faces the story of
their father's wrong deeds. Truly you cannot afford to be ignorant of
facts so grave as these.

FOOTNOTES:

[2] For an extended presentation of the character and diseases which
accompany vice, the reader is referred to the chapters which treat of
this subject in "What a Young Man Ought to Know." Every young woman
should be intelligent upon these important subjects. There is nothing
in this book to young men which a young woman approaching maturity may
not know, both with propriety and benefit, so that she may most
successfully protect herself from possible companionship with
well-dressed and polite but impure young men by discreetly placing the
book in the hands of her father and brothers, that they may become
intelligent concerning the dangers against which they can most
successfully protect her. It might not be improper for her, after due
acquaintance, to see that the book is placed in the hands of the one
who seeks to become her husband and the father of her children, that
she may at the proper time, and before it is too late, learn whether he
has always lived by the standards of social purity which are there set
up, and whether he is able to bring to the union the same unsullied
life and character which he expects and requires of her.



