
CHAPTER XXXII.

ENGAGEMENTS.


There now sparkles on your finger a ring that symbolizes the promise
you have given to become a wife. You are engaged, and there now arises
in your mind the query as to the conduct of yourselves during this
period of engagement: How much of privilege shall you grant your
lover? As you are promised to each other for life, are you not
warranted in assuming towards each other greater personal familiarity?
May you not with perfect modesty allow endearments and caresses that
hitherto have not been permissible?

I take it for granted that you are not one of those unwise young women
who permit themselves to become engaged for fun; who consider an
engagement as of so little seriousness that it may be made and broken
without regret. I have known girls who even enter into engagements
just in order to feel justified in greater freedom of conduct without
compunction of conscience. If such engagements do not violate the code
of conventionalities they certainly infringe upon the moral code.

It is not strange that girls should fail to see all the dangers of
such conduct--that they should not comprehend that thus they become
sources of temptation to their lovers, and may even imperil their own
safety.

But your engagement is an honest one, your love is true, based upon
thorough acquaintance; you have mutual respect and entire confidence
in each other. May you not now throw aside much of the restrictions
that have surrounded your association and manifest your affection in
reciprocal demonstrations?

We often read the advice to young people not to enter upon long
engagements, and the reason given is that it exacts too much in the
way of self-control, is too great a nervous strain, is too full of
peril. I would like to quote just here a few words by Dr. C.W. Eaton:

"Away with the sexual argument against engagements, and let us all set
about that cultivation of will and purpose which can make the weakest
a tower of strength and the arbiter of his own destiny; and let us say
to our appetites, Thus far shalt thou come and no farther, neither
shalt thou presume to deny to thy master the best earthly
companionship which may come into his life. It may be a far harder
task than the ardent and poetical lover allows himself at first to
think, but the hardest battles are best worth the fighting; and what
manner of men should we become if we systematically evaded life's
conflicts, instead of meeting them squarely and fighting them through
manfully? Dr. Bourgeois says: 'The ancient custom of betrothals is the
safeguard for the purity of morals and the happy association of man
and wife. This institution was known to the Greeks, the Hebrews, the
Romans, and during the Middle Ages. In Germany it has still preserved
its poetical and moral character. The young people are sometimes
affianced many years before their marriage. We see the young man, thus
betrothed, with heart full of his chaste love, absent himself for a
time in order to finish his education, to perform his studies of
science or art, his apprenticeship to a trade, and to prepare himself
for manly life. He returns to his betrothed with a soul which has
remained pure, with a reason enlarged and fortified. Then both are
ripe for the austere duties of marriage.

"'Chaste love, consecrated by betrothals, can be cultivated in the
midst of work. It lightens toil, it banishes _ennui_, it illumines the
horizon of life with delightful prospects; it excites in the young man
the manly courage and the high intelligence to create for himself a
position in the world; in woman, the noble ambition to perfect herself
to become a worthy companion and good adviser.

"'During the stormy period of youth it is the only means of preserving
the virgin purity of the heart and of the body. Does anyone believe
that young men who in good season have in their hearts a love strong
and worthy of them would profane themselves, as they so often
otherwise do, in vile affections, in those relations of a day, giving
themselves a holocaust to beauty without soul, or even to
licentiousness without beauty?'"

Emerson says: "If, however, from too much conversing with material
objects the soul was gross, and misplaced its satisfaction in the
body, it reaped nothing but sorrow, body being unable to fulfill the
promise which beauty holds out; but if, accepting the hint of these
visions and suggestions which beauty makes to his mind, the soul
passes through the body and fails to admire strokes of character, and
the lovers contemplate one another in their discourses and their
actions, then they pass to the true palace of beauty, more and more
inflame their love of it, and by this love extinguishing the base
affection, as the sun puts out fire by shining on the hearth, they
become pure and hallowed. By conversation with that which is in itself
excellent, magnanimous, lowly and just, the lover comes to a warmer
love of these nobilities, and a quicker apprehension of them. Then he
passes from loving them in one to loving them in all, and so is the
one beautiful soul only the door through which he enters to the
society of all true and pure souls. In the particular society of his
mate he attains a clearer sight of any spot, any taint which her
beauty has contracted from this world, and is able to point it out,
and this with mutual joy that they are now able, without offense, to
indicate blemishes and hindrances in each other, and give to each all
help and comfort in curing the same. And beholding in many souls the
traits of the divine beauty, and separating in each soul that which is
divine from the taint which it has contracted in the world, the lover
ascends to the highest beauty, to the love and knowledge of the
Divinity, by steps on this ladder of created souls."

And this all means that when the thought of the sex-relation
constitutes in the mind of either the idea of marriage, then the
wedding ceremony will be supposed to remove all restrictions, and the
only limit of gratification will be the limit of desire. Under these
circumstances the close familiarity of a long engagement would be a
mental and physical tax, because the self-control exercised is felt to
be only temporary, and will be no longer needed when the wedding
ceremony has been said.

But if the idea of marriage is nobler, if the sex-relation is
consecrated to its highest purpose of reproduction, if marriage is
felt to be only an added opportunity for self-control, which will be
more difficult then because there will be no restraint except that
which is self-imposed, then the engagement will be felt to be a time
of gradual preparation for that closer relationship which needs more
will-power because opportunity is greater.

Under these conditions the lovers will be aiming towards an ideal
which recognizes that in wedded life all that is lasting in affection,
in tender courtesy, in most intimate companionship, in sweetest
demonstration, is possible without the physical union, which in itself
is the most transitory of pleasures, but which in unlimited indulgence
becomes the most domineering of passions, exhaustive of physical power
and of mental vigor, and absolutely annihilating all true love.

If you ask why there should exist this marvelous drawing of the sexes
towards each other if their relation is not based upon the exercise of
sex-functions, I reply that sex is more than its local expression; it
is inherent in mind as well as body, and therefore sexual power may be
expressed in masculine courage, energy or daring, or in feminine
constancy, self-abnegation, or sweet courtesy. Sexual attraction is
not limited to the local expression, nor creative power to
reproduction of kind, but may give a stimulus to the intellectual
companionship of men and women, and result in the creation of nobler
ideals and grander aspirations.

Having settled in your mind your attitude towards your lover, let us
consider what it shall be towards your family during these days of
the engagement. Naturally you will not feel a separation from the home
circle as keenly as do the other members of your family. You two are
so absorbed in each other, are so busy exchanging ideas, in becoming
acquainted, that you are oblivious to the change brought about in your
family. You think you two ought to be allowed the privilege of
_tete-a-tetes_, for of course you cannot talk freely together in the
hearing of others. This is true. You should have times of seclusion,
when, without a sense of oppression through fear of criticism or
jesting, you can rhapsodize, or quote poetry and open your hearts'
treasures to each other. But you still owe a duty to your home.
Doubtless your mother is not now as necessary to your happiness as you
are to hers. She is thinking of you with most tender solicitude, she
misses your presence, she already begins to feel the loneliness of the
inevitable separation. If you are thoughtful you will see to it that
the separation does not begin sooner than is necessary. Then, too,
your parents need to get acquainted with this new member whom you are
to introduce into the family, and he needs to know them. He will think
none the less of you if he sees that you do not allow him to
monopolize you entirely, that you recognize your obligations to the
family and that you expect him to recognize them also, and, in
addition, his obligations to show them due courtesy and attention. He
is not to absorb you entirely, to take you out of the home circle, but
he is to come in and be a part of it, even as you are to become one in
the home of which he is a member. You need to remember that he is son
and brother to women who loved him long before you knew him, and that
he still owes them attention and thoughtful, affectionate courtesy.

Never allow yourself to feel jealous of his mother or sisters. The
fact that he is a loving, thoughtful son and brother is in a measure a
guarantee that he will be a loving, thoughtful husband.

Let me add to this advice a word more. Do not allow yourself to feel
jealous of him in any way. Jealousy is the quintessence of
selfishness, and no other passion is so destructive of happiness, so
full of the contagion of evil. If your lover is not to be trusted, you
would be wise to end the engagement at once. If he is to be trusted,
that trust should be absolute. I said you should not allow him to
monopolize you, neither should you attempt to monopolize him. There
are other people in the world besides yourself, and other occupations
than the business of waiting on you. If you make him feel that he dare
not speak to anyone but you, that he dare not think of anything but
you, he will begin to chafe under the restraint and feel a desire to
break the bonds that are becoming fetters. If he were not your
acknowledged lover, if you were anxious to win his love, but were a
little uncertain as to your power to do so, you would not meet him
with tears and upbraidings because he had for one moment seemed to
forget you, but you would at once use every possible effort to make
yourself more attractive in his eyes than any other person could
possibly be. You will be wise to use those same tactics now, even
though his allegiance is pledged to you. Be so charming that no one
else can be considered so entertaining; that no one else can be so
wise, so witty, so sympathetic, so altogether lovely, that everything
but yourself is forgotten; and then believe in him so absolutely that
he could not possibly swerve in his fidelity to you. Have you ever
thought that to accuse one of a certain wrong act may be just the way
to suggest to him the possibility of committing it? If one trusts you
implicitly, that very trust is a constant suggestion to be true, and
doubt is a suggestion to act worthy of being doubted.

You must trust each other or you have no sure foundation for future
love and happiness. It needs a great deal of good common sense to
learn how to live happily in marriage. You may have chosen wisely. The
man may be honest, pure, kindly, intelligent, and Christian, but he is
human, therefore not perfect. He has faults, peculiarities, moods,
perhaps tempers, and he will probably not wait until you are married
to begin to show them. There will come differences of opinions,
divergences in desires, clashings in judgment. Now is the time to
display your tact, to learn how to express an opposing opinion without
arousing antagonism, to yield a desire for the sake of a greater love
than that of self, to adhere to principle without unpleasant
discussion; in short, to be dignified and womanly without pettiness or
littleness of any kind. You remember the words of Ruskin, that the
woman must be "incorruptibly good, instinctively, infallibly wise, not
for self-development, but for self-renunciation," and that will be the
highest development.

No doubt you will think that some of this advice should be given to
young men as well as to young women, and I think so too, and were I
talking to your lover I could say many warning words; but just now I
am telling you things that he does not need to hear, and I do not need
to tell you what, if I had the chance, I would say to him. You are to
train yourself and not him, and yet I would not have you ignorant of
your power over him in developing in him all that is noblest and best.
You should hold him ever to his highest ideals. He should never feel
so absolutely sure of your adoration as to imagine that it will endure
a lowering of his standards. You have been posing a little before each
other. Doubtless you were not aware of this, but, now that you have
each gained the heart of the other, you may sometimes feel that you
can relax; but this is a dangerous error. You should continue to be as
thoughtful, as courteous, as careful as ever; you should endeavor
really to be all that you have tried or appeared to be during these
days of courtship. You will be none too perfect even then.

Once, in talking to a group of women, I asserted that a wife should
exact of her husband as high a tone of morality as of her lover, that
she should not allow him to become lax in his conversation with her
any more than with any other woman. One woman thought me too strict.
She said men liked to feel that at home they could do as they pleased,
and would resent a wife's interference with their right to be loose in
their talk in their own home. I replied that the home is not the man's
nor the woman's alone; it is theirs jointly; that each has a right to
demand that the other shall not pollute or poison the air, the food,
the water or the moral atmosphere; and the wife who allows
contamination of the thought-atmosphere of the home is as culpable as
if she were to permit poison to be put into the food.

As a man admires the girl who respects herself too much to permit him
to tell her questionable stories, so will he reverence the wife who
refuses to allow him to degrade himself in her presence either by
speech or conduct. Love would not so often fail if wives knew the
secret of retaining it, and that is not by sacrifice of principle, nor
by tearful reproaches and upbraidings, but by being true to the
highest impulses, and while having the good common sense that can make
all reasonable allowance for fallibility, still permits no lowering of
moral standards, no willful falling short of the very best.



