
CHAPTER XXXI.

REQUISITES OF A HUSBAND.


Having spent so much time in the study of principles and laws, we will
now return to the discussion of this concrete case. What can you
decide in regard to this individual young man to whom you think you
have given your heart? What is he in his inheritance? What is he in
himself? I do not ask that he shall have inherited wealth, for that
often proves a young man's ruin, but does he come of an honest,
industrious family? Have you just reason to suppose that he will make
a fair success of life? Is his father shiftless, lazy, improvident? If
so, it will be harder for him to be provident, business-like. Has he
true ideas of the dignity of life and his own responsibility? Is he
looking for an "easy job," or does he purpose to give a fair
equivalent for all that he receives? Would he rather toil at honest
manual labor than be supported by a rich father-in-law?

What are his ideas as to his responsibility in the founding of a home?
How will he look upon his wife? As an equal, a companion, or as a
plaything, a petted child, or a sort of upper servant? What value does
he put upon the wife's labor in the conducting of the household? Will
he consider that the money he hands over to her is a gift from him, or
only a fair recognition of the value of her work, a rendering to her
of her share in the family purse?

What is his estimate of woman? Is she an individual with rights, with
intellect and heart, with a judgment to be consulted, opinions worthy
of recognition, or only an appendage to man, created for his comfort
and to be held in her "sphere" by his will?

What are his defects of temper, or his weaknesses of body? Of course,
to you now he seems perfection, and yet he is a human being, fallible
and imperfect. If his faults are similar to yours, you double the
possibility of their inheritance by your children. If you both have a
tendency to lung trouble, the probabilities are that your children
will have consumption. If you both are of rheumatic proclivities, you
may expect a manifestation of the same early in the life of your
children. If you both are "nervous" or irritable in temper, both
jealously inclined, or are morbid and melancholy, you need not be
surprised at an intensifying of these qualities in your little ones.

If there are more serious family traits, such as insanity, epilepsy,
alcoholism and the like, it might even be your duty never to run the
risk of their transmission.

I once spoke on heredity when in the audience sat a young man by the
side of his _fiancee_, who, I was afterwards told, had been in an
insane asylum three times, and yet he purposed marrying her.

I know a clergyman who has wisely dedicated himself to a celibate life
because there is marked insanity in his family.

You chafe a little under this reiteration of the duty you owe to
children yet unborn, and who may possibly never exist, and perhaps you
say, as I have heard girls say, "Oh, I don't mean to have any
children;" and perhaps you add, "I don't see why people may not marry
and be happy just by themselves without having children."

It is not strange that you should not understand all that is involved
in such a statement. It is true that some married people do not have
children, and are comparatively happy, and yet perhaps if we could
read their hearts we should find that the one great longing of their
lives is for the blessing of a child.

It is natural to desire to know the joys of parenthood. In the home,
through the cares and love, the anxiety, self-sacrifice, tenderness
and patience which accompany parenthood, the education of the
individual is made most complete and perfect.

The girl who marries without a willingness to accept these
responsibilities is willing to sacrifice that which, rightly borne,
will bring her the highest development. If she purposes deliberately
to avoid motherhood she puts herself in a position of moral peril, for
such immunity is not often secured except at the risk of criminality.
I say not often, although I believe that if husband and wife are
actuated by the worthy motive of not inflicting on posterity some
dower of woe, they are justified in a marriage that does not
contemplate parenthood, if they are of lofty purpose enough to live
solely in mental and spiritual companionship. But all attempts to
secure the pleasure of a physical relation and escape its legitimate
results are a menace to the health and a degradation to the moral
nature. This subject, and the questions arising therefrom, will be
discussed more fully in the next book of this series, "What a Young
Wife Ought to Know."

But how is a girl to know all these things concerning her lover's
ideas, thoughts, principles, and purposes? Many of these you think
cannot be known until after marriage, and then it is too late. That is
true; therefore be wise and learn all you can of each other's habits,
peculiarities, opinions, and predilections now, before it is too late.
Talk over business matters. Find out what your lover's ideas are as to
the wife's right to a pecuniary recognition of the value of her labor
in making the home. Does he think that she earns nothing, and that
what he gives her of his money is a donation for which she gives no
return? I know a young woman who had been self-supporting before her
marriage who felt timid about asking her husband for money. So she
wore her wedding garments until they were shabby, went without money
when her own funds were exhausted, and kept silent for five years, and
her husband--a young clergyman--never thought to ask her if she needed
anything, never observed her growing shabbiness. When at last she
summoned courage to tell him her needs, he was overwhelmed with regret
for his own lack of thought and observation, and yet he could not
understand why she should hesitate to ask for money. "Why, it is all
yours, dear," he said. "You were only asking for what already belongs
to you." And many young husbands are just as obtuse, therefore they
should receive in advance the instruction that is needed to prevent a
possibility of such neglect. Have it understood that if you are worthy
to be trusted as a bearer of the name and a sharer of the fortunes of
a man, you are worthy to share also the burden of the knowledge of his
business experiences, and to bear the responsibility of economically
guarding his interests in the expenditure of money which, by your love
and care and labor, you have helped him to earn.

I think a young woman should know something of the personal habits of
her future husband. Does he like fresh air, or does he want the
windows hermetically sealed at night. Is he a believer in the
godliness of cleanliness? I have just read of two people who married
after a six week's acquaintance, knowing nothing of each other's
antecedents, personal habits, caprices or principles. The man proved
to be a regular hypochondriac, taking medicine constantly, at one time
with five doctors prescribing for him. He counted his pulse at every
odd moment, and looked at his tongue instead of at the eyes of his
wife, as he had done when a lover. He had a dread of pure air, and was
as averse to bathing as a cat. The woman had lived in the open air,
taken a daily morning bath, and was disgusted with those who did not
do likewise. The writer says, "She stormed, took her baths, and opened
the windows; he cried, took no baths, shut the windows, and called the
doctors." There is no need to depict the unhappiness of the home, and
yet no doubt the girl would have been shocked had anyone suggested
that she inquire into these facts concerning her lover. But if she had
been less romantic and more practical, if she had remembered that the
marriage contract would bind her for life to one who would be more
closely connected with her than anyone else could be, and this union
for life, by day and by night, constant, continuous, and not to be
annulled by any such small matters as bad breath or unpleasant
personal habits, perhaps she would have considered it no small matter
to discover the possible causes of disgust before they became fixtures
in her life.

And perhaps, also, she would have given her own personal habits more
consideration. True love will endure much, but it sometimes dies in
the presence of untidiness, of carelessness as to dress or room, or
lack of sweetness of person or of breath. If you demand much of a
husband, he has a right to demand just as much from you. If there are
habits concerning which you would rather he as a lover should be
ignorant, believe me that it is even more important that as a husband
he should not know them. Therefore employ your available time before
marriage to rid yourself of them. If a lover would be disenchanted to
see the room from which his blooming, beauteous adored one had
departed, bearing the marks of carelessness and disorder, with soiled
clothing, unmade bed, shoes, hose and dresses all in tumbled heaps on
chairs and floor, remember that the marriage ceremony does not make
such a room more attractive to the husband, who must not only see but
share its discomforts.

In addition to the knowledge of each other's personal peculiarities
there should be an understanding of each other's ideas as to the
duties and responsibilities of their proposed relation to each other.
I lately received a letter from a young woman who asks, "How freely do
you think two engaged young people may talk concerning their future
life? Would it not be indelicate for them to discuss their future
relations, the possibility and responsibilities of parenthood, etc.?"

I answer, that depends on the young people. If they have false ideas,
if they have little or no scientific knowledge, if their thoughts are
filled with wrong mental pictures, they will not know how to talk
wisely and beneficially. But these two young people are intelligent,
are scientifically educated, are Christians. Their hearts are pure,
their standards high, their motives praiseworthy. It would seem that
they might talk as freely as their inclination would prompt. In fact
there seems to me more indelicacy and more danger from long evenings
spent in murmuring ardent protestations of love and indulging in
embraces and endearments than in a frank, serious conversation on the
realities and responsibilities of marriage, an exchange of earnest
thoughts, voiced in chaste, well-chosen language--a conversation which
by its very solemnity is lifted out of the realm of sense-pleasure
into the dignified domain of science and morality.



