

II

RELIGIO MEDICI


    At all events, it is certain that if any medical man had come to
    Middlemarch with the reputation of having definite religious
    views, of being given to prayer and of otherwise showing an
    active piety, there would have been a general presumption
    against his medical skill.
                GEORGE ELIOT.

When a medically educated man talks and writes of religion and of God,
he is rightly enough questioned by his brothers--who are too busy with
the hard work of practice to be concerned with anything but material
problems. To me the word "God" is symbolic of the power which created
and which maintains the universe. The sunrise and the stars of heaven
give me some idea of his majesty, the warmth and tenderness of human
love give me some idea of his divine love. That is all I know, but it is
enough to make life glow; it is enough to inspire the most intense
devotion to any good cause; it is enough to make me bear suffering with
some degree of patience; and it is enough, finally, to give me some
confidence and courage even in the face of the great mystery of death.
Why this or another conception of God should produce such a profound
result upon any one, I do not know, except that in some obscure way it
connects the individual with the divine plan, and does not leave him
outside in despair and loneliness. However that may be, it will be
conceded that a religious conception of some kind does much toward
justifying life, toward making it strong and livable, and so has
directly to do with certain important problems of illness and health.
The most practical medical man will admit that any illness is made
lighter and more likely to recover in the presence of hope and serenity
in the mind of the patient.

Naturally the great bulk of medical practice calls for no handling other
than that of the straight medical sort. A man comes in with a crushed
finger, a girl with anaemia--the way is clear. It is only in deeper, more
intricate departments of medicine that we altogether fail. The
bacteriologist and the pathologist have no use for mental treatment, in
their departments. But when we come to the case of the nervously
broken-down school teacher, or the worn-out telegrapher, that is another
matter. Years may elapse before work can be resumed--years of dependence
and anxiety. Here, a new view of life is often more useful than drugs, a
view that accepts the situation reasonably after a while, that does not
grope blindly and impatiently for a cure, but finds in life an
inspiration that makes it good in spite of necessary suffering and
limitations. Often enough we cannot promise a cure, but we must be
prepared to give something better.

A great deal of the fatigue and unhappiness of the world is due to the
fact that we do not go deep enough in our justification for work or
play, or for any experience, happy or sad. There is a good deal of a
void after we have said, "Art for art's sake," or "Play for the joy of
playing," or even after we have said, "I am working for the sake of my
family, or for some one who needs my help." That is not enough; and
whether we realize it or not, the lack of deeper justification is at the
bottom of a restlessness and uncertainty which we might not be willing
to acknowledge, but which nevertheless is very real.

I am not satisfied when some moralist says, "Be good and you will be
happy." The kind of happiness that comes from a perfunctory goodness is
a thing which I cannot understand, and which I certainly do not want. If
I work and play and serve and employ, making up the fabric of a busy
life, if I attain a very real happiness, I am tormented by the desire to
know why I am doing it, and I am not satisfied with the answer I
usually get. The patient may not be cured when he is relieved of his
anaemia, or when his emaciation has given place to the plumpness and
suppleness and physical strength that we call health. The man whom we
look upon as well, and who has never known physical illness, is not well
in the larger sense until he knows why he is working, why he is living,
why he is filling his life with activity. In spite of the elasticity and
spring of the world's interests, there must come often, and with a kind
of fatal insistence, the deep demand for a cause, for a justification.
If there is not an adequate significance behind it, life, with all its
courage and accomplishment, seems but a sorry thing, so full of pathos,
even in its brightest moments, so shadowed with a sense of loss and of
finality that the bravest heart may well fail and the truest courage
relax, supported only by the assurance that this way lies happiness or
that right is right.

What is this knowledge that the world is seeking, but can never find?
What is this final justification? If we seek it in its completeness, we
are doomed always to be ill and unsatisfied. If we are willing to look
only a little way into the great question, if we are willing to accept a
little for the whole, content because it is manifestly part of the final
knowledge, and because we know that final knowledge rests with God
alone, we shall understand enough to save us from much sorrow and
painful incompleteness.

There is, in the infinitely varied and beautiful world of nature, and in
the hearts of men, so much of beauty and truth that it is a wonder we do
not all realize that these things of common life may be in us and for us
the daily and hourly expression of the infinite being we call God. We do
not see God, but we do feel and know so much that we may fairly believe
to be of God that we do not need to see Him face to face. It is
something more than imagination to feel that it is the life of God in
our lives, so often unrecognized or ignored, that prompts us to all the
greatness and the inspiration and the accomplishment of the world. If we
could know more clearly the joy of such a conception, we should dry up
at its source much of the unhappiness which is, in a deep and subtle
way, at the bottom of many a nervous illness and many a wretched
existence.

The happiness which is found in the recognition of kinship with God,
through the common things of life, in the experiences which are so
significant that they could not spring from a lesser source, the
happiness which is not sought, but which is the inevitable result of
such recognition--this experience goes a long way toward making life
worth living.

If we do have this conception of life, then some of the old, old
questions that have vexed so many dwellers upon the earth will no longer
be a source of unhappiness or of illness of mind or body. The question
of immortality, for instance, which has made us afraid to die, will no
longer be a question--we shall not need to answer it, in the presence of
God, in our lives and in the world about us. We shall be content finally
to accept whatever is in store for us--so it be the will of God. We may
even look for something better than mere immortality, something more
divine than our gross conception of eternal life.

This is a religion that I believe medical men may teach without
hesitation whenever the need shall arise. I know well enough that many a
blunt if kindly man cannot bring himself to say these words, even if he
believes them, but I do think that in some measure they point the way to
what may wisely be taught.

There is a practice of medicine--the common practice--that is concerned
with the body only, and with its chemical and mechanical reactions. We
can have nothing but respect and admiration for the men who go on year
after year in the eager pursuit of this calling. We know that such a
work is necessary, that it is just as important as the educational
practice of which I write. We know that without the physical side
medicine would fail of its usefulness and that disease and death would
reap far richer harvests: I only wish the two naturally related aspects
of our dealing with patients might not be so completely separated that
they lose sight of each other. As a matter of fact, both elements are
necessary to our human welfare. If medicine devotes itself altogether to
the cure and prevention of physical disease, it will miss half of its
possibilities. It is equally true that if we forget the physical
necessities in our zeal for spiritual hygiene, we shall get and deserve
complete and humiliating failure. Many men will say, "Why mix the two?
Why not let the preachers and the philosophers preach and the doctors
follow their own ways?" For the most part this may have to be the
arrangement, but the doctor who can see and treat the spiritual needs of
his patient will always be more likely to cure in the best sense than
the doctor who sees only half of the picture. On the other hand, the
philosopher is likely to be a comparatively poor doctor, because he
knows nothing of medicine, and so can see only the other half of the
picture. There is much to be said for the religion of medicine if it can
be kept free from cant, if it can be simple and rational enough to be
available for the whole world.


