

III

THOUGHT AND WORK


    I wish I had a trade!--It would animate my arms and tranquilize
    my brain.
                SENANCOUR.

    "Doe ye nexte thynge."--_Old English Proverb_.

Since our minds are so constantly filled with anxiety, there would seem
to be at least one sure way to be rid of it--to stop thinking.

A great many people believe that the mind will become less effective,
that life will become dull and purposeless, unless they are constantly
thinking and planning and arranging their affairs. I believe that the
mind may easily and wisely be free from conscious thought a good deal of
the time, and that the greatest progress and development in mind often
comes when the thinker is virtually at rest, when his mind is to all
intents and purposes blank. The busy, unconscious mind does its best
work in the serenity of an atmosphere which does not interfere and
confuse.

It is true that the greatest conceptions do not come to the untrained
and undisciplined mind. But do we want great conceptions all the time?
There is a technical training for the mind which is, of course,
necessary for special accomplishments, but this is quite another matter.
Even this kind of thought must not obtrude too much, lest we become
conscious of our mental processes and so end in confusion.

One of the greatest benefits of work with the hands, or of objective and
constructive work with the mind, is that it saves us from unending hours
of thinking. Work should, of course, find its fullest justification as
an expression of faith. If we have ever so dim a vision of a greater
significance in life, of its close relationship to infinite things, we
become thereby conscious of the need of service, of the need of work. It
is the easy, natural expression of our faith, the inevitable result of
a spiritual contact with the great working forces of the world. It is
work above all else that saves us from the disasters of conflicting
thought.

A few years ago a young man came to me, suffering from too much
thinking. He had just been graduated from college and his head was full
of confused ideas and emotions. He was also very tired, having
overworked in his preparation for examinations, and because he had not
taken the best care of his body. The symptoms he complained of were
sleeplessness and worry, together with the inevitable indigestion and
headache. Of course, as a physician, I went over the bodily functions
carefully, and studied, as far as I might, into the organic conditions.
I could find no evidence of physical disease. I did not say, "There is
nothing the matter with you"; for the man was sick. I told him that he
was tired, that he had thought too much, that he was too much concerned
about himself, and that as a result of all this his bodily functions
were temporarily upset. He thought he ought to worry about himself,
because otherwise he would not be trying to get well. I explained to him
that this mistaken obligation was the common reason for worry, and that
in this case, at least, it was quite unnecessary and even harmful for
him to go on thinking about himself. That helped a little, but not
nearly enough, because when a man has overworked, when he has begun to
worry, and when his various bodily functions show results of worry, no
reasoning, no explanations, can wholly relieve him. I said to this young
man, "In spite of your discomforts, in spite of your depression and
concern in regard to yourself, you will get well if you will stop
thinking about the matter altogether. You must be first convinced that
it is best for you to stop thinking, that no harm or violence can
result, and then you must be helped in this direction by going to work
with your hands--that will be life and progress, it will lead you to
health."

Fortunately I had had some experience with nervous illness, and I knew
that unless I managed for this man the character and extent of his work,
he would not only fail in it, but of its object, and so become more
confused and discouraged. I knew the troubled mind, in this instance,
might find its solace and its relief in work, but that I must choose the
work carefully to suit the individual, and I must see that the nervously
fatigued body was not pushed too hard.

In the town where I live is a blacksmith shop, presided over by a genial
old man who has been a blacksmith since he was a boy, and in whose hands
iron is like clay. I took my patient down to the smithy and said, "Here
is a young man whom I want to put to work. He will pay for the chance. I
want you first to teach him to make hand-wrought nails." This was a
good deal of a joke to the smith and to the patient, but they saw that I
was in earnest and agreed to go ahead. We got together the proper tools
and proceeded to make nails, a job which is really not very difficult.
After an hour's work, I called off my patient, much to his disgust, for
he was just beginning to be interested. But I knew that if he were to
keep on until fatigue should come, the whole matter would end in
trouble. So the next day, with some new overalls and a leather apron
added to the equipment, we proceeded to another hour's work. We went on
this way for three or four days, before the time was increased.

The interest of the patient was always fresh, he was eager for more, and
he did not taste the dregs of fatigue. Yet he did get the wholesome
exercise, and he did get the strong turning of the mind from its worry
and concern. Of course, the rest of the day was taken care of in one
way or another, but the work was the central feature. In a week, we were
at it two hours a day, in three weeks, four hours, and in a month, five
hours. He had made a handsome display of hand-wrought nails, a superior
line of pokers and shovels for fireplaces, together with a number of
very respectable andirons. On each of these larger pieces of handiwork
my patient had stamped his initials with a little steel die that was
made for him. Each piece was his own, each piece was the product of his
own versatility and his own strength. His pride and pleasure in this
work were very great, and well they might be, for it is a fine thing to
have learned to handle so intractable a material as iron. But in
handling the iron patiently and consistently until he could do it
without too much conscious thinking, and so without effort, he had also
learned to handle himself naturally, more simply and easily.

As a matter of fact, the illness which had brought this boy to me was
pretty nearly cured by his blacksmithing, because it was an illness of
the mind and of the nerves, and not of the body, although the body had
suffered in its turn. That young man, instead of becoming a nervous
invalid as he might have done, is now working steadily in partnership
with his father, in business in the city. I had found him a very
interesting patient, full of originality and not at all the tedious and
boresome person he might have been had I listened day after day, week
after week to the recital of his ills. I was willing to listen,--I did
listen,--but I also gave him a new trend of life, which pretty soon made
his complaints sound hollow and then disappear.

Of course, the problem is not always so simple as this, and we must
often deal with complexities of body and mind requiring prolonged
investigation and treatment. I cite this case because it shows clearly
that relief from some forms of nervous illness can come when we stop
thinking, when we stop analyzing, and then back up our position with
prescribed work.

There may be some nervous invalids who read these lines who will say,
"But I have tried so many times to work and have failed." Unfortunately,
such failure must often occur unless we can proceed with care and with
understanding. But the principle remains true, although it must be
modified in an infinite variety to meet the changing conditions of
individuals.

I see a great many people who are conscientiously trying to get well
from nervous exhaustion. They almost inevitably try too hard. They think
and worry too much about it, and so exhaust themselves the more. This is
the greater pity because it is the honest and the conscientious people
who make the greatest effort. It is very hard for them to realize that
they must stop thinking, stop trying, and if possible get to work
before they can accomplish their end. We shall have to repeat to them
over and over again that they must stop thinking the matter out, because
the thing they are attempting to overcome is too subtle to be met in
that way. So, if they are fortunate, they may rid themselves of the
vagueness and uncertainty of life, until all the multitude of details
which go to make up life lose their desultoriness and their lack of
meaning, and they may find themselves no longer the subjects of physical
or nervous exhaustion.


