

IV

IDLENESS


    O ye! who have your eyeballs vex'd and tir'd,
      Feast them upon the wideness of the sea.
                KEATS.

    Extreme busyness, whether at school or college, kirk or market,
    is a symptom of deficient vitality; and a faculty for idleness
    implies a catholic appetite and a strong sense of personal
    identity.
                STEVENSON.

It is an unfortunate fact that very few people are able to be idle
successfully. I think it is not so much because we misuse idleness as
because we misinterpret it that the long days become increasingly
demoralizing. I would ask no one to accept a forced idleness without
objection or regret. Such an acceptance would imply a lack of spirit, to
say the least. But idleness and rest are not incompatible; neither are
idleness and service, nor idleness and contentment. If we can look upon
rest as a preparation for service, if we can make it serve us in the
opportunity it gives for quiet growth and legitimate enjoyment, then it
is fully justified and it may offer advantages and opportunity of the
best.

The chief trouble with idleness is that it so often means introspection,
worry, and impatience, especially to those conscientious souls who would
fain be about their business.

I have for a long time been accustomed to combat the worry and fret of
necessary idleness--not by forbidding it, not by advising struggle and
fight against it, but by insisting that the best way to get rid of it is
to leave it alone, to accept it. When we do this there may come a kind
of fallow time in which the mind enriches and refreshes itself beyond
our conception.

I would rather my patient who must rest for a long time would give up
all thought of method, would give up all idea of making his mind follow
any particular line of thought or absence of thought. I know that the
mind which has been under conscious control a good deal of the time is
apt to rebel at this freedom and to indulge in all kinds of alarming
extravagances. I am sure, however, that the best way to meet these
demands for conscious control is to be careless of them, to be willing
to experience these extravagances and inconsistencies without fear, in
the belief that finally will come a quiet and peace which will be all
that we can ask. The peace of mind that is unguided, in the conscious
and literal sense, is a thing which too few of us know.

Mr. Arnold Bennett, in his little book, "How to Live on Twenty-four
Hours a Day," teaches that we should leave no time unused in our lives;
that we should accomplish a great deal more and be infinitely more
effective and progressive if we devoted our minds to the definite
working-out of necessary problems whenever those times occur in which we
are apt to be desultory. I wish here to make a plea for desultoriness
and for an idleness which goes even beyond the idleness of the man who
reads the newspaper and forgets what he has read. It seems to me better,
whether we are sick or well, to allow long periods in our lives when we
think only casually. To the good old adage, "Work while you work and
play while you play," we might well add, "Rest while you rest," lest in
the end you should be unable successfully either to work or play.

A man is not necessarily condemned to tortures of mind because he must
rest for a week or a month or a year. I know that there must be anxious
times, especially when idleness means dependence, and when it brings
hardship to those who need our help. But the invalid must not try
constantly to puzzle the matter out. If we do not make ourselves sick
with worry, we shall be able sometime to approach active life with
sufficient frankness and force. It is the constant effort of the poor,
tired mind to solve its problems that not only fails of its object, but
plunges the invalid deeper into discouragement and misunderstanding. How
cruel this is, and how unfortunate that it should come more commonly to
those who try the hardest to overcome their handicaps, to throw off the
yoke of idleness and to be well.

When you have tried your best to get back to your work and have failed,
when you have done this not once but many times, it is inevitable that
misunderstanding should creep in, inevitable that you should question
very deeply and doubt not infrequently. Yet the chances are that one of
the reasons for your failure is that you have tried too hard, that you
have not known how to rest. When you have learned how to rest, when you
have learned to put off thinking and planning until the mind becomes
fresh and clear, when you are in a fair way to know the joy of idleness
and the peace of rest, you are a great deal more likely to get back to
efficiency and to find your way along the great paths of activity into
the world of life.

It is not so much the idleness, then, as the attempt to overcome its
irksomeness, that makes this condition painful. The invalid in bed is in
a trap, to be tormented by his thoughts unless he knows the meaning of
successful idleness. This knowledge may come to him by such strategy as
I have suggested--by giving up the struggle against worry and fret; but
peace will come surely, steadily, "with healing in its wings," when the
mind is changed altogether, when life becomes free because of a growth
and development that finds significance even in idleness, that sees the
world with wise and patient eyes.

In a way it does not matter, your physical condition or mine, if our
"eyes have seen the glory" that deifies life and makes even its waste
places beautiful. What is that view from your window as you lie in your
bed? A bit of the sea, if you are fortunate, a corner of garden, surely,
the top of an elm tree against the blue. What is it but the revelations
of a God in the world? There is enough that is sad and unhappy, but over
all are these simple, ineffable things. If the garden is an expression
of God in the world, then the world and life are no longer meaningless.
Even idleness becomes in some degree bearable because it is a part of a
significant world.

Unfortunately, the idleness of disability often means pain, the wear and
tear of physical or nervous suffering. That is another matter. We cannot
meet it fully with any philosophy. My patients very often beg to know
the best way to bear pain, how they may overcome the attacks of "nerves"
that are harder to bear than pain. To such a question I can only say
that the time to bear pain is before and after. Live in such a way in
the times of comparative comfort that the attacks are less likely to
appear and easier to bear when they do come. After the pain or the
"nervous" attack is over, that is the time to prevent the worst features
of another. Forget the distress; live simply and happily in spite of the
memory, and you will have done all that the patient himself can do to
ward off or to make tolerable the next occasion of suffering. Pain
itself--pure physical pain--is a matter for the physician's judgment. It
is his business to seek out the causes and apply the remedy.


