

V

RULES OF THE GAME


    It is not growing like a tree
    In bulk, doth make man better be.
                BEN JONSON.

    It is a good thing to have a sound body, better to have a sane
    mind, but neither is to be compared to that aggregate of virile
    and decent qualities which we call character.
                THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

    The only effective remedy against inexorable necessity is to
    yield to it.
                PETRARCH.

When I go about among my patients, most of them, as it happens,
"nervously" sick, I sometimes stop to consider why it is they are ill. I
know that some are so because of physical weakness over which they have
no control, that some are suffering from the effects of carelessness,
some from wilfulness, and more from simple ignorance of the rules of the
game. There are so many rules that no one will ever know them all, but
it seems that we live in a world of laws, and that if we transgress
those laws by ever so little, we must suffer equally, whether our
transgression is a mistake or not, and whether we happen to be saints or
sinners. There are laws also which have to do with the recovery of poise
and balance when these have been lost. These laws are less well observed
and understood than those which determine our downfall.

The more gross illnesses, from accident, contagion, and malignancy, we
need not consider here, but only those intangible injuries that disable
people who are relatively sound in the physical sense. It is true that
nervous troubles may cause physical complications and that physical
disease very often coexists with nervous illness, but it is better for
us now to make an artificial separation. Just what happens in the human
economy when a "nervous breakdown" comes, nobody seems to know, but mind
and body cooeperate to make the patient miserable and helpless. It may
be nature's way of holding us up and preventing further injury. The
hold-up is severe, usually, and becomes in itself a thing to be managed.

The rules we have wittingly or unwittingly broken are often unknown to
us, but they exist in the All-Wise Providence, and we may guess by our
own suffering how far we have overstepped them. If a man runs into a
door in the dark, we know all about that,--the case is simple,--but if
he runs overtime at his office and hastens to be rich with the result of
a nervous dyspepsia--that is a mystery. Here is a girl who "came out"
last year. She was apparently strong and her mother was ambitious for
her social progress. That meant four nights a week for several months at
dances and dinners, getting home at 3 A.M. or later. It was gay and
delightful while it lasted, but it could not last, and the girl went to
pieces suddenly; her back gave out because it was not strong enough to
stand the dancing and the long-continued physical strain. The nerves
gave out because she did not give her faculties time to rest, and
perhaps because of a love affair that supervened. The result was a year
of invalidism, and then, because the rules of recovery were not
understood, several years more of convalescence. Such common rules
should be well enough understood, but they are broken everywhere by the
wisest people.

The common case of the broken-down school teacher is more unfortunate.
This tragedy and others like it are more often, I believe, due to unwise
choice of profession in the first place. The women's colleges are
turning out hundreds of young women every year who naturally consider
teaching as the field most appropriate and available. Probably only a
very small proportion of these girls are strong enough physically or
nervously to meet the growing demands of the schools. They may do well
for a time, some of them unusually well, for it is the sensitive,
high-strung organism that is appreciative and effective. After a while
the worry and fret of the requirements and the constant nag of the
schoolroom have their effect upon those who are foredoomed to failure in
that particular field. The plight of such young women is particularly
hard, for they are usually dependent upon their work.

It is, after all, not so much the things we do as the way we do them,
and what we think about them, that accomplishes nervous harm. Strangely
enough, the sense of effort and the feeling of our own inadequacy damage
the nervous system quite as much as the actual physical effort. The
attempt to catch up with life and with affairs that go on too fast for
us is a frequent and harmful deflection from the rules of the game. Few
of us avoid it. Life comes at us and goes by very fast. Tasks multiply
and we are inadequate, responsibilities increase before we are ready.
They bring fatigue and confusion. We cannot shirk and be true. Having
done all you reasonably can, stop, whatever may be the consequences.
That is a rule I would enforce if I could. To do more is to drag and
fail, so defeating the end of your efforts. If it turns out that you are
not fit for the job you have undertaken, give it up and find another, or
modify that one until it comes within your capacity. It takes courage to
do this--more courage sometimes than is needed to make us stick to the
thing we are doing. Rarely, however, will it be necessary for us to give
up if we will undertake and consider for the day only such part of our
task as we are able to perform. The trouble is that we look at our work
or our responsibility all in one piece, and it crushes us. If we cannot
arrange our lives so that we may meet their obligations a little at a
time, then we must admit failure and try again, on what may seem a
lower plane. That is what I consider the brave thing to do. I would
honor the factory superintendent, who, finding himself unequal to his
position, should choose to work at the bench where he could succeed
perfectly.

The habit of uncertainty in thought and action, bred, as it sometimes
is, from a lack of faith in man and in God, is, nevertheless, a thing to
be dealt with sometimes by itself. Not infrequently it is a petty habit
that can be corrected by the exercise of a little will power. I believe
it is better to decide wrong a great many times--doing it quickly--than
to come to a right decision after weakly vacillating. As a matter of
fact, we may trust our decisions to be fair and true if our life's
ideals are beautiful and true.

We may improve our indecisions a great deal by mastering their unhappy
details, but we shall not finally overcome them until life rings true
and until all our acts and thoughts become the solid and inevitable
expression of a healthy growing regard for the best in life, a call to
right living that is no mean dictum of policy, but which is renewed
every morning as the sun comes out of the sea. However inconsequential
the habit of indecision may seem, it is really one of the most disabling
of bad habits. Its continuance contributes largely to the sum of nervous
exhaustion. Whatever its origin, whether it stands in the relation of
cause or effect, it is an indulgence that insidiously takes the snap and
sparkle out of life and leaves us for the time being colorless and weak.

Next to uncertainty, an uninspired certainty is wrecking to the best of
human prospects. The man whose one idea is of making himself and his
family materially comfortable, or even rich, may not be coming to
nervous prostration, but he is courting a moral prostration that will
deny him all the real riches of life and that will in the end reward
him with a troubled mind, a great, unsatisfied longing, unless, to be
sure, he is too smug and satisfied to long for anything.

The larger life leads us inevitably away from ourselves, away from the
super-requirements of our families. It demands of them and of ourselves
an unselfishness that is born of a love that finds its expression in the
service of God. And what is the service of God if it is not such an
entering into the divine purposes and spirit that we become with God
re-creators in the world--working factors in the higher evolution of
humanity? While we live we shall get and save, we shall use and spend,
we shall serve the needs of those dependent upon us, but we shall not
line the family nest so softly that our children become powerless. We
shall not confine our charities to the specified channels, where our
names will be praised and our credit increased. We shall give and serve
in secret places with our hearts in our deeds. Then we may possess the
untroubled mind, a treasure too rich to be computed. We shall not have
it for the seeking; it may exist in the midst of what men may call
privations and sorrows; but it will exist in a very large sense and it
will be ours. The so-called hard-headed business man who never allows
himself to be taken advantage of, whose dealings are always strict and
uncompromising, is very apt to be a particularly miserable invalid when
he is ill. I cannot argue in favor of business laxity,--I know the
imperative need of exactness and finality,--but I do believe that if we
are to possess the untroubled mind we must make our lives larger than
the field of dollars and cents. The charity that develops in us will
make us truly generous and free from the reaction of hardness.

It is a great temptation to go on multiplying the rules of the game.
There are so many sensible and necessary pieces of advice which we all
need to have emphasized. That is the course we must try to avoid. The
child needs to be told, arbitrarily for a while, what is right, and what
is wrong, that he must do this, and he must not do that. The time comes,
however, when the growing instinct toward right living is the thing to
foster--not the details of life which will inevitably take care of
themselves if the underlying principle is made right. It must be the
ideal of moral teaching to make clear and pure the source of action.
Then the stream will be clear and pure. Such a stream will purify itself
and neutralize the dangerous inflow along its banks. It is true that
great harm may come from the polluted inflows, but they will be less and
less harmful as the increasing current from the good source flows down.

We shall have to look well to our habits lest serious ills befall, but
that must never be the main concern or we shall find ourselves living
very narrow and labored lives; we shall find that we are failing to
observe one of the most important rules of the game.


