

VI

THE NERVOUS TEMPERAMENT


    Beyond the ugly actual, lo, on every side,
    Imagination's limitless domain.
                BROWNING.

    He that too much refines his delicacy will always endanger his
    quiet.
                SAMUEL JOHNSON.

    The great refinement of many poetical gentlemen has rendered
    them practically unfit for the jostling and ugliness of life.
                STEVENSON.

It has been my fortune as a physician to deal much with the so-called
nervous temperament. I have come both to fear and to love it. It is the
essence of all that is bright, imaginative, and fine, but it is as
unstable as water. Those who possess it must suffer--it is their lot to
feel deeply, and very often to be misunderstood by their more practical
friends. All their lives these people will shed tears of joy, and more
tears of sorrow. I would like to write of their joy, of the perfect
satisfaction, the true happiness that comes in creating new and
beautiful things, of the deep pleasure they have in the appreciation of
good work in others. But with the instinct of a dog trained for a
certain kind of hunting I find myself turning to the misfortunes and the
ills.

The very keenness of perception makes painful anything short of
perfection. What will such people do in our clanging streets? What of
those fine ears tuned to the most exquisite appreciation of sweet sound?
What of that refinement of hearing that detects the least departure from
the rhythm and pitch in complex orchestral music? And must they bear the
crash of steel on stone, the infernal clatter of traffic? Well, yes,--as
a matter of fact--they must, at least for a good many years to come,
until advancing civilization eliminates the city noise. But it is not
always great noises that disturb and distract. There is a story told of
a woman who became so sensitive to noise that she had her house made
sound-proof: there were thick carpets and softly closing doors;
everything was padded. The house was set back from a quiet street, but
that street was strewn with tanbark to check the sound of carriages.
Surely here was bliss for the sensitive soul. I need not tell the rest
of the story, how absolutely necessary noises became intolerable, and
the poor woman ended by keeping a man on the place to catch and silence
the tree toads and crickets.

There is nothing to excuse the careless and unnecessary noises of the
world--we shall dispose of them finally as we are disposing of
flamboyant signboards and typhoid flies. But meanwhile, and always, for
that matter, the sensitive soul must learn to adjust itself to
circumstances and conditions. This adjustment may in itself become a
fine art. It is really the art by which the painter excludes the
commonplace and irrelevant from his landscape. Sometimes we have to do
this consciously; for the most part, it should be a natural, unconscious
selection.

I am sure it is unwise to attempt at any time the dulling of the
appreciative sense for the sake of peace and comfort. Love and
understanding of the beautiful and true is too rare and fine a thing to
be lost or diminished under any circumstances. The cure, as I see it, is
to be found in the cultivation of the faculty that finds some good in
everything and everybody. This is the saving grace--it takes great bulks
of the commonplace and distils from the mass a few drops of precious
essence; it finds in the unscholarly and the imperfect, rare traces of
good; it sees in man, any man, the image of God, to be justified and
made evident only in the sublimity of death, perhaps, but usually to be
developed in life.

The nervous person is often morose and unsocial--perhaps because he is
not understood, perhaps because he falls so short of his own ideals.
Often he does not find kindred spirits anywhere. I do not think we
should drive such a man into conditions that hurt, but I do believe that
if he is truly artistic, and not a snob, he may lead himself into a
larger social life without too much sacrifice.

The sensitive, high-strung spirit that does not give of its own best
qualities to the world of its acquaintance, that does not express itself
in some concrete way, is always in danger of harm. Such a spirit turned
in upon itself is a consuming fire. The spirit will burn a long time and
suffer much if it does not use its heat to warm and comfort the world of
need.

Real illness makes the nervous temperament a much more formidable
difficulty--all the sensitive faculties are more sensitive--irritability
becomes an obsession and idleness a terror.

The nervous temperament under irritation is very prone to become
selfish--and very likely to hide behind this selfishness, calling it
temperament. The man who flies into a passion when he is disturbed, or
who spends his days in torment from the noises of the street; the woman
of high attainment who has retired into herself, who is moody and
unresponsive,--these unfortunates have virtually built a wall about
their lives, a wall which shuts out the world of life and happiness.
From the walls of this prison the sounds of discord and annoyance are
thrown back upon the prisoner intensified and multiplied. The wall is
real enough in its effect, but will cease to exist when the prisoner
begins to go outside, when he begins to realize his selfishness and his
mistake. Then the noises and the irritations will be lost in the wider
world that is open to him. After all, it is only through unselfish
service in the world of men that this broadening can come.

There is no lack of opportunity for service. Perhaps the simplest and
most available form of service is charity,--the big, professional kind,
of course,--and beyond that the greater field of intimate and personal
charity. I know a girl of talent and ability--herself a nervous
invalid--sick and helpless for the lack of a little money which would
give her a chance to get well. I do not mean money for luxuries, for
foolish indulgences, but money to buy opportunity--money that would lift
her out of the heavy morass of poverty and give her a chance. She falls
outside the beaten path of charity. She is not reached by the usual
philanthropies. I also know plenty of people who could help that girl
without great sacrifice. They will not do it because they give money to
the regular charities--they will not do it because sometimes generosity
has been abused. So they miss the chance of broadening and developing
their own lives.

I know well enough that objective interest can rarely be forced--it
must usually come the other way about--through the broadening of life
which makes it inevitable. Sometimes I wish I could force that kind of
development, that kind of charity. Sometimes I long to take the rich
neurasthenic and make him help his brother, make him develop a new art
that shall save people from sorrow and loss. We are all together in this
world, and all kin; to recognize it and to serve the needs of the
unfortunate as we would serve our own children is the remedy for many
ills. It is the new art, the final and greatest of all artistic
achievements; it warms our hearts and opens our lives to all that is
wholesome and good. This is one of the crises in which my theory of
"inspiration first" may fail. Here the charity may have to come first,
may have to be insisted upon before there can be any inspiration or any
further joy in life. It is not always charity in the usual sense that is
required; sometimes the charity that gives something besides money is
best. But charity in any good sense means self-forgetfulness, and that
is a long way on the road to nervous health. Give of yourself, give of
your substance, and you will cease to be troubled with the penalties of
selfishness. Then take the next step--that gives not because life has
come back, but because the world has become larger and warmer and
happier. When the giver gives of his sympathy and of his means because
he wants to,--not because he has to do so,--he will begin to know what I
mean when I say it is better to have the inspiration first.


