

VIII

THE LIGHTER TOUCH


    Heart not so heavy as mine,
    Wending late home,
    As it passed my window
    Whistled itself a tune.
                EMILY DICKINSON.

I have never seen good come from frightening worriers. It is no doubt
wise to speak the truth, but it seems to me a mistake to say in public
print or in private advice that worry leads to tragedies of the worst
sort. No matter how hopeful we may be in our later teaching about the
possibilities of overcoming worry, the really serious worrier will
pounce upon the original tragic statement and apply it with terrible
insistence to his own case.

I would not minimize the seriousness of worry, but I am convinced that
we can rarely overcome it by direct voluntary effort. It does not go
until we forget it, and we do not forget it if we are always trying
consciously to overcome it. We worriers must go about our
business--other business than that of worry.

Life is serious--alas, too serious--and full enough of pathos. We cannot
joke about its troubles; they are real. But, at least, we need not
magnify them. Why should we act as though everything depended upon our
efforts, even the changing seasons and the blowing winds? No doubt we
are responsible for our own acts and thoughts and for the welfare of
those who depend upon us. The trouble is we take unnecessary
responsibilities so seriously that we overreach ourselves and defeat our
own good ends.

I would make my little world more blessedly careless--with an _abandon_
that loves life too much to spoil it with worry. I would cherish so
great a desire for my child's good that I could not scold and bear down
upon him for every little fault, making him a worrier too, but,
instead, I would guide him along the right path with pleasant words and
brave encouragement. The condemnation of faults is rarely constructive.

We had better say to the worriers, "Here is life; no matter what
unfortunate things you may have said or done, you must put all evil
behind you and live--simply, bravely, well." The greater the evil,
the greater the need of forgetting. Not flippantly, but reverently,
leave your misdeeds in a limbo where they may not rise to haunt you.
This great thing you may do, not with the idea of evading or escaping
consequences, but so that past evil may be turned into present and
future good. The criminal himself is coming to be treated this way. He
is no longer eternally reminded of his crime. He is taken out into the
sunshine and air and is given a shovel to dig with. A wonderful thing is
that shovel. With it he may bury the past and raise up a happier,
better future. We must care so much to expiate our sins that we are
willing to neglect them and live righteously. That is true repentance,
constructive repentance.

We cannot suddenly change our mental outlook and become happy when grief
has borne us down. "For the broken heart silence and shade,"--that is
fair and right. I would say to those who are unhappy, "Do not try to be
happy, you cannot force it; but let peace come to you out of the great
world of beauty that calmly surrounds our human suffering, and that
speaks to us quietly of God." Genuine laughter is not forced, but we may
let it come back into our lives if we know that it is right for it to
come.

We have all about us instances of the effectiveness of the lighter touch
as applied to serious matters. The life of the busy surgeon is a good
example. He may be, and usually is, brimming with sympathy, but if he
were to feel too deeply for all his patients, he would soon fail and
die. He goes about his work. He puts through a half-dozen operations in
a way that would send cold shivers down the back of the uninitiated. And
yet he is accurate and sure as a machine. If he were to take each case
upon his mind in a heavy, consequential way, if he were to give deep
concern to each ligature he ties, and if he were to be constantly afraid
of causing pain, he would be a poor surgeon. His work, instead of being
clean and sharp, would suffer from over-conscientiousness. He might
never finish an operation for fear his patient would bleed to death.
Such a man may be the reverse of flippant, and yet he may actually enjoy
his somber work. Cruel, bloodthirsty? Not at all. These men--the great
surgeons--are as tender as children. But they love their work, they
really care very deeply for their patients. The successful ones have the
lighter touch and they have no time for worry.

Sometimes we wish to arouse the public conscience. Do the long columns
of figures, the impressive statistics, wake men to activity? It is
rather the keen, bright thrust of the satirist that saves the day. Once
in a New England town meeting there was a movement for a much-needed new
schoolhouse. By the installation of skylights in the attic the old
building had been made to accommodate the overflow of pupils. The
serious speakers in favor of the new building had left the audience
cold, when a young man arose and said he had been up into the attic and
had seen the wonderful skylights that were supposed to meet the needs of
the children. "I have seen them," he said; "we used to call them
scuttles when I was a boy." A hundred thousand dollars was voted for the
new schoolhouse.

There is a natural gayety in most of us which helps more than we realize
to keep us sound. The pity is that when responsibilities come and
hardships come, we repress our lighter selves sternly, as though such
repression were a duty. Better let us guard the springs of happiness
very, very jealously. The whistling boy in the dark street does more
than cheer himself on the way. He actually protects himself from evil,
and brings courage not only to himself, but to those who hear him. I do
not hold for false cheerfulness that is sometimes affected, but a brave
show of courage in a forlorn hope will sometimes win the day. It is
infinitely more likely to win than a too serious realization of the
danger of defeat. The show of courage is often not a pretense at all,
but victory itself.

The need of the world is very great and its human destiny is in our
hands. Half of those who could help to right the wrongs are asleep or
too selfishly immersed in their own affairs. We need more helpers like
my friend of the skylights. Most of us are far too serious. The
slumberers will slumber on, and the worriers will worry, the serious
people will go ponderously about until some one shows them how
ridiculous they are and how pitiful.


