

X

THE VIRTUES


    The virtues hide their vanquished fires
    Within that whiter flame--
    Till conscience grows irrelevant
    And duty but a name.
                FREDERICK LAWRENCE KNOWLES.

In most books I have read on "nerves" and similar subjects, advice is
given, encouragement is given, but the necessity for patience is not
made clear. Patience is typical of all the other virtues. Many a man has
followed the best of advice for a time, and has become discouraged
because the promised results did not materialize. It is disappointing,
surely, to have lived upon a diet for months only to find that you still
have dyspepsia, or to have followed certain rules of morality with great
precision and enthusiasm without obtaining the untroubled mind. We are
accustomed to see results in the material world and naturally expect
them everywhere. The trouble is we do not always recognize improvements
when we see them, and we insist upon certain preconceived changes as a
result of our endeavors. The physician is apt rashly to promise definite
physical accomplishments in a given time. He is courting disappointment
and distrust when he does so. We all want to get relief from our
symptoms, and we are inclined to insist upon a particular kind of relief
so strongly that we fail to appreciate the possibilities of another and
a better relief which may be at hand. The going astray in this
particular is sometimes very unfortunate. I have known a man to rush
frantically from one doctor to another, trying to obtain relief for a
particular pain or discomfort, unwilling to rest long enough to find out
that the trouble would have disappeared naturally if he had taken the
advice of the first physician, to live without impatience and within his
limitations.

The human body is a very complex organism, and sometimes pain and
distress are better not relieved, since they may be the expression of
some deeper maladjustment which must first be straightened out. This is
also true of the mind--in which the unhappy proddings of conscience had
better not be cured by anodynes or by evasion unless we are prepared to
go deeply enough to make them disappear spontaneously. We must sometimes
insist upon patience, though it should exist as a matter of
course--patience with ourselves and with others. The physician who
demands and secures the greatest degree of patience from his clients is
the most successful practitioner, for no life can go on successfully
without patience. If patience can be spontaneous,--the natural result of
a broadening outlook,--then it will be permanent and serviceable; the
other kind, that exists by extreme effort, may do for a while, but it is
a poor makeshift.

I always feel like apologizing when I ask a man or a woman to be
tolerant or charitable or generous or, for that matter, to practice any
of the ordinary virtues. Sound living should spring unbidden from the
very joy of life; it should need no justification and certainly no
urging. But unfortunately, as the world now stands, there are men and
groups of men who do not see the light. There is a wide contagion of
selfishness and short-sightedness among the well-to-do, and a necessary
federation of protection and selfishness among the poor. The practical
needs of life, artificial as they are among the rich, and terribly
insistent as they are among the poor, blind us to larger considerations.

If all matters of welfare, public or private, could be treated
unselfishly, how quickly we should be rid of some of the great evils
that afflict the race. I am inclined to think that much of the goodness
of people does come in that way, unconsciously, naturally, as the light
flows from the sun. Yet I suppose that in our present order, and until,
through the years, the better time arrives, we must very often ask
ourselves and others to be good and to be charitable, just because it is
right, or worse still because it is good policy.

A man grows better, more human, more intelligent, as he practices the
virtues. He is safer, no doubt, and the world is better. It is even true
that, by the constant practice of virtues, he may come finally to
espouse goodness and become thoroughly good. That is the hopeful thing
about it and the reason why we may consistently ask or demand the
routine practice of the virtues. But let us hold up all the time in our
teaching and in our lives the other course, the development of the
inspiration that includes all virtues and that makes all our way easy
and plain in a world where confusion reigns, because men are going at
the problem of right living the wrong way around.

The practice of good living will never be easy in its details, but if it
is sure in its inspiration there will be no question of the final
triumph. We shall have to fight blindly sometimes and with all the
strength and persistence of animals at bay. We shall fail sometimes,
too, and that is not always the worst thing that can happen. It is the
glory of life that we shall slowly triumph over ourselves and the world.
It is the glory of life that out of sore trouble, in the midst of
poverty and human injustice, may rise, spontaneous and serene, the
spirit of self-sacrifice, the unconquerable spirit of service that does
not question, that expresses the divine tenderness in terms of human
love. Through the times of darkness and doubt which must inevitably
come, there will be for those who cherish such a vision, and who come
back to it again and again, no utter darkness, no trouble that wholly
crushes, no loss that wholly destroys.

If we could not understand it before, it will slowly dawn upon us that
the life of Christ exemplified all these things. Charity, kindliness,
service, patience,--all these things which have seemed so hard will
become in our lives, as in his, the substance and expression of our
faith. The great human virtues will become easy and natural, the
untroubled mind, or as much of it as is good to possess, will be ours,
not because we have escaped trouble, but because we have disarmed it,
have welcomed it even, so long as it has served to strengthen and
ennoble our lives.


