

12.

O my brethren, I consecrate you and point you to a new nobility:  ye shall
become procreators and cultivators and sowers of the future;--

--Verily, not to a nobility which ye could purchase like traders with
traders' gold; for little worth is all that hath its price.

Let it not be your honour henceforth whence ye come, but whither ye go!
Your Will and your feet which seek to surpass you--let these be your new
honour!

Verily, not that ye have served a prince--of what account are princes now!
--nor that ye have become a bulwark to that which standeth, that it may
stand more firmly.

Not that your family have become courtly at courts, and that ye have
learned--gay-coloured, like the flamingo--to stand long hours in shallow
pools:

(For ABILITY-to-stand is a merit in courtiers; and all courtiers believe
that unto blessedness after death pertaineth--PERMISSION-to-sit!)

Nor even that a Spirit called Holy, led your forefathers into promised
lands, which I do not praise:  for where the worst of all trees grew--the
cross,--in that land there is nothing to praise!--

--And verily, wherever this "Holy Spirit" led its knights, always in such
campaigns did--goats and geese, and wryheads and guyheads run FOREMOST!--

O my brethren, not backward shall your nobility gaze, but OUTWARD!  Exiles
shall ye be from all fatherlands and forefather-lands!

Your CHILDREN'S LAND shall ye love:  let this love be your new nobility,--
the undiscovered in the remotest seas!  For it do I bid your sails search
and search!

Unto your children shall ye MAKE AMENDS for being the children of your
fathers:  all the past shall ye THUS redeem!  This new table do I place
over you!

13.

"Why should one live?  All is vain!  To live--that is to thrash straw; to
live--that is to burn oneself and yet not get warm."--

Such ancient babbling still passeth for "wisdom"; because it is old,
however, and smelleth mustily, THEREFORE is it the more honoured.  Even
mould ennobleth.--

Children might thus speak:  they SHUN the fire because it hath burnt them!
There is much childishness in the old books of wisdom.

And he who ever "thrasheth straw," why should he be allowed to rail at
thrashing!  Such a fool one would have to muzzle!

Such persons sit down to the table and bring nothing with them, not even
good hunger:--and then do they rail:  "All is vain!"

But to eat and drink well, my brethren, is verily no vain art!  Break up,
break up for me the tables of the never-joyous ones!

14.

"To the clean are all things clean"--thus say the people.  I, however, say
unto you:  To the swine all things become swinish!

Therefore preach the visionaries and bowed-heads (whose hearts are also
bowed down):  "The world itself is a filthy monster."

For these are all unclean spirits; especially those, however, who have no
peace or rest, unless they see the world FROM THE BACKSIDE--the
backworldsmen!

TO THOSE do I say it to the face, although it sound unpleasantly:  the
world resembleth man, in that it hath a backside,--SO MUCH is true!

There is in the world much filth:  SO MUCH is true!  But the world itself
is not therefore a filthy monster!

There is wisdom in the fact that much in the world smelleth badly:
loathing itself createth wings, and fountain-divining powers!

In the best there is still something to loathe; and the best is still
something that must be surpassed!--

O my brethren, there is much wisdom in the fact that much filth is in the
world!--

15.

Such sayings did I hear pious backworldsmen speak to their consciences, and
verily without wickedness or guile,--although there is nothing more
guileful in the world, or more wicked.

"Let the world be as it is!  Raise not a finger against it!"

"Let whoever will choke and stab and skin and scrape the people:  raise not
a finger against it!  Thereby will they learn to renounce the world."

"And thine own reason--this shalt thou thyself stifle and choke; for it is
a reason of this world,--thereby wilt thou learn thyself to renounce the
world."--

--Shatter, shatter, O my brethren, those old tables of the pious!  Tatter
the maxims of the world-maligners!--