

16.

"He who learneth much unlearneth all violent cravings"--that do people now
whisper to one another in all the dark lanes.

"Wisdom wearieth, nothing is worth while; thou shalt not crave!"--this new
table found I hanging even in the public markets.

Break up for me, O my brethren, break up also that NEW table! The
weary-o'-the-world put it up, and the preachers of death and the jailer:
for lo, it is also a sermon for slavery:--

Because they learned badly and not the best, and everything too early and
everything too fast; because they ATE badly: from thence hath resulted
their ruined stomach;--

--For a ruined stomach, is their spirit: IT persuadeth to death! For
verily, my brethren, the spirit IS a stomach!

Life is a well of delight, but to him in whom the ruined stomach speaketh,
the father of affliction, all fountains are poisoned.

To discern: that is DELIGHT to the lion-willed! But he who hath become
weary, is himself merely "willed"; with him play all the waves.

And such is always the nature of weak men: they lose themselves on their
way. And at last asketh their weariness: "Why did we ever go on the way?
All is indifferent!"

TO THEM soundeth it pleasant to have preached in their ears: "Nothing is
worth while! Ye shall not will!" That, however, is a sermon for slavery.

O my brethren, a fresh blustering wind cometh Zarathustra unto all
way-weary ones; many noses will he yet make sneeze!

Even through walls bloweth my free breath, and in into prisons and
imprisoned spirits!

Willing emancipateth:  for willing is creating:  so do I teach.  And ONLY
for creating shall ye learn!

And also the learning shall ye LEARN only from me, the learning well!--He
who hath ears let him hear!

17.

There standeth the boat--thither goeth it over, perhaps into vast
nothingness--but who willeth to enter into this "Perhaps"?

None of you want to enter into the death-boat!  How should ye then be
WORLD-WEARY ones!

World-weary ones!  And have not even withdrawn from the earth!  Eager did I
ever find you for the earth, amorous still of your own earth-weariness!

Not in vain doth your lip hang down:--a small worldly wish still sitteth
thereon!  And in your eye--floateth there not a cloudlet of unforgotten
earthly bliss?

There are on the earth many good inventions, some useful, some pleasant:
for their sake is the earth to be loved.

And many such good inventions are there, that they are like woman's
breasts:  useful at the same time, and pleasant.

Ye world-weary ones, however!  Ye earth-idlers!  You, shall one beat with
stripes!  With stripes shall one again make you sprightly limbs.

For if ye be not invalids, or decrepit creatures, of whom the earth is
weary, then are ye sly sloths, or dainty, sneaking pleasure-cats.  And if
ye will not again RUN gaily, then shall ye--pass away!

To the incurable shall one not seek to be a physician:  thus teacheth
Zarathustra:--so shall ye pass away!

But more COURAGE is needed to make an end than to make a new verse:  that
do all physicians and poets know well.--

18.

O my brethren, there are tables which weariness framed, and tables which
slothfulness framed, corrupt slothfulness:  although they speak similarly,
they want to be heard differently.--

See this languishing one!  Only a span-breadth is he from his goal; but
from weariness hath he lain down obstinately in the dust, this brave one!

From weariness yawneth he at the path, at the earth, at the goal, and at
himself:  not a step further will he go,--this brave one!

Now gloweth the sun upon him, and the dogs lick at his sweat:  but he lieth
there in his obstinacy and preferreth to languish:--

--A span-breadth from his goal, to languish!  Verily, ye will have to drag
him into his heaven by the hair of his head--this hero!

Better still that ye let him lie where he hath lain down, that sleep may
come unto him, the comforter, with cooling patter-rain.

Let him lie, until of his own accord he awakeneth,--until of his own accord
he repudiateth all weariness, and what weariness hath taught through him!

Only, my brethren, see that ye scare the dogs away from him, the idle
skulkers, and all the swarming vermin:--

--All the swarming vermin of the "cultured," that--feast on the sweat of
every hero!--