

19.

I form circles around me and holy boundaries; ever fewer ascend with me
ever higher mountains:  I build a mountain-range out of ever holier
mountains.--

But wherever ye would ascend with me, O my brethren, take care lest a
PARASITE ascend with you!

A parasite:  that is a reptile, a creeping, cringing reptile, that trieth
to fatten on your infirm and sore places.

And THIS is its art:  it divineth where ascending souls are weary, in your
trouble and dejection, in your sensitive modesty, doth it build its
loathsome nest.

Where the strong are weak, where the noble are all-too-gentle--there
buildeth it its loathsome nest; the parasite liveth where the great have
small sore-places.

What is the highest of all species of being, and what is the lowest?  The
parasite is the lowest species; he, however, who is of the highest species
feedeth most parasites.

For the soul which hath the longest ladder, and can go deepest down:  how
could there fail to be most parasites upon it?--

--The most comprehensive soul, which can run and stray and rove furthest in
itself; the most necessary soul, which out of joy flingeth itself into
chance:--

--The soul in Being, which plungeth into Becoming; the possessing soul,
which SEEKETH to attain desire and longing:--

--The soul fleeing from itself, which overtaketh itself in the widest
circuit; the wisest soul, unto which folly speaketh most sweetly:--

--The soul most self-loving, in which all things have their current and
counter-current, their ebb and their flow:--oh, how could THE LOFTIEST SOUL
fail to have the worst parasites?

20.

O my brethren, am I then cruel?  But I say:  What falleth, that shall one
also push!

Everything of to-day--it falleth, it decayeth; who would preserve it!  But
I--I wish also to push it!

Know ye the delight which rolleth stones into precipitous depths?--Those
men of to-day, see just how they roll into my depths!

A prelude am I to better players, O my brethren!  An example!  DO according
to mine example!

And him whom ye do not teach to fly, teach I pray you--TO FALL FASTER!--