

9.

Long slept Zarathustra; and not only the rosy dawn passed over his
head, but also the morning.  At last, however, his eyes opened, and
amazedly he gazed into the forest and the stillness, amazedly he gazed
into himself.  Then he arose quickly, like a seafarer who all at once
seeth the land; and he shouted for joy:  for he saw a new truth.  And he
spake thus to his heart:

A light hath dawned upon me:  I need companions--living ones; not
dead companions and corpses, which I carry with me where I will.

But I need living companions, who will follow me because they want
to follow themselves--and to the place where I will.

A light hath dawned upon me.  Not to the people is Zarathustra to speak,
but to companions!  Zarathustra shall not be the herd's herdsman and hound!

To allure many from the herd--for that purpose have I come.  The people and
the herd must be angry with me:  a robber shall Zarathustra be called by
the herdsmen.

Herdsmen, I say, but they call themselves the good and just.  Herdsmen, I
say, but they call themselves the believers in the orthodox belief.

Behold the good and just!  Whom do they hate most?  Him who breaketh up
their tables of values, the breaker, the lawbreaker:--he, however, is the
creator.

Behold the believers of all beliefs!  Whom do they hate most?  Him who
breaketh up their tables of values, the breaker, the law-breaker--he,
however, is the creator.

Companions, the creator seeketh, not corpses--and not herds or believers
either.  Fellow-creators the creator seeketh--those who grave new values on
new tables.

Companions, the creator seeketh, and fellow-reapers:  for everything is
ripe for the harvest with him.  But he lacketh the hundred sickles:  so he
plucketh the ears of corn and is vexed.

Companions, the creator seeketh, and such as know how to whet their
sickles.  Destroyers, will they be called, and despisers of good and evil.
But they are the reapers and rejoicers.

Fellow-creators, Zarathustra seeketh; fellow-reapers and fellow-rejoicers,
Zarathustra seeketh:  what hath he to do with herds and herdsmen and
corpses!

And thou, my first companion, rest in peace!  Well have I buried thee in
thy hollow tree; well have I hid thee from the wolves.

But I part from thee; the time hath arrived.  'Twixt rosy dawn and rosy
dawn there came unto me a new truth.

I am not to be a herdsman, I am not to be a grave-digger.  Not any more
will I discourse unto the people; for the last time have I spoken unto the
dead.

With the creators, the reapers, and the rejoicers will I associate:  the
rainbow will I show them, and all the stairs to the Superman.

To the lone-dwellers will I sing my song, and to the twain-dwellers; and
unto him who hath still ears for the unheard, will I make the heart heavy
with my happiness.

I make for my goal, I follow my course; over the loitering and tardy will I
leap.  Thus let my on-going be their down-going!

10.

This had Zarathustra said to his heart when the sun stood at noon-tide.
Then he looked inquiringly aloft,--for he heard above him the sharp call of
a bird.  And behold!  An eagle swept through the air in wide circles, and
on it hung a serpent, not like a prey, but like a friend:  for it kept
itself coiled round the eagle's neck.

"They are mine animals," said Zarathustra, and rejoiced in his heart.

"The proudest animal under the sun, and the wisest animal under the sun,--
they have come out to reconnoitre.

They want to know whether Zarathustra still liveth.  Verily, do I still
live?

More dangerous have I found it among men than among animals; in dangerous
paths goeth Zarathustra.  Let mine animals lead me!

When Zarathustra had said this, he remembered the words of the saint in the
forest.  Then he sighed and spake thus to his heart:

"Would that I were wiser!  Would that I were wise from the very heart, like
my serpent!

But I am asking the impossible.  Therefore do I ask my pride to go always
with my wisdom!

And if my wisdom should some day forsake me:--alas! it loveth to fly
away!--may my pride then fly with my folly!"

Thus began Zarathustra's down-going.


ZARATHUSTRA' DISCOURSES.