

Chapter LIV.  The Three Evil Things.

Nietzsche is here completely in his element. Three things hitherto
best-cursed and most calumniated on earth, are brought forward to be
weighed. Voluptuousness, thirst of power, and selfishness,--the three
forces in humanity which Christianity has done most to garble and
besmirch,--Nietzsche endeavours to reinstate in their former places of
honour. Voluptuousness, or sensual pleasure, is a dangerous thing to
discuss nowadays. If we mention it with favour we may be regarded, however
unjustly, as the advocate of savages, satyrs, and pure sensuality. If we
condemn it, we either go over to the Puritans or we join those who are wont
to come to table with no edge to their appetites and who therefore grumble
at all good fare. There can be no doubt that the value of healthy innocent
voluptuousness, like the value of health itself, must have been greatly
discounted by all those who, resenting their inability to partake of this
world's goods, cried like St Paul: "I would that all men were even as I
myself." Now Nietzsche's philosophy might be called an attempt at giving
back to healthy and normal men innocence and a clean conscience in their
desires--NOT to applaud the vulgar sensualists who respond to every
stimulus and whose passions are out of hand; not to tell the mean, selfish
individual, whose selfishness is a pollution (see Aphorism 33, "Twilight of
the Idols"), that he is right, nor to assure the weak, the sick, and the
crippled, that the thirst of power, which they gratify by exploiting the
happier and healthier individuals, is justified;--but to save the clean
healthy man from the values of those around him, who look at everything
through the mud that is in their own bodies,--to give him, and him alone, a
clean conscience in his manhood and the desires of his manhood. "Do I
counsel you to slay your instincts? I counsel to innocence in your
instincts." In verse 7 of the second paragraph (as in verse I of paragraph
19 in "The Old and New Tables") Nietzsche gives us a reason for his
occasional obscurity (see also verses 3 to 7 of "Poets"). As I have already
pointed out, his philosophy is quite esoteric. It can serve no purpose with
the ordinary, mediocre type of man. I, personally, can no longer have any
doubt that Nietzsche's only object, in that part of his philosophy where he
bids his friends stand "Beyond Good and Evil" with him, was to save higher
men, whose growth and scope might be limited by the too strict observance
of modern values from foundering on the rocks of a "Compromise" between
their own genius and traditional conventions. The only possible way in
which the great man can achieve greatness is by means of exceptional
freedom--the freedom which assists him in experiencing HIMSELF. Verses 20
to 30 afford an excellent supplement to Nietzsche's description of the
attitude of the noble type towards the slaves in Aphorism 260 of the work
"Beyond Good and Evil" (see also Note B.)