

Chapter LXXIII.  The Higher Man.  Par. 1.

Nietzsche admits, here, that at one time he had thought of appealing to the
people, to the crowd in the market-place, but that he had ultimately to
abandon the task.  He bids higher men depart from the market-place.

Par. 3.

Here we are told quite plainly what class of men actually owe all their
impulses and desires to the instinct of self-preservation.  The struggle
for existence is indeed the only spur in the case of such people.  To them
it matters not in what shape or condition man be preserved, provided only
he survive.  The transcendental maxim that "Life per se is precious" is the
ruling maxim here.

Par. 4.

In the Note on Chapter LVII. (end) I speak of Nietzsche's elevation of the
virtue, Courage, to the highest place among the virtues.  Here he tells
higher men the class of courage he expects from them.

Pars. 5, 6.

These have already been referred to in the Notes on Chapters LVII. (end)
and LXXI.

Par. 7.

I suggest that the last verse in this paragraph strongly confirms the view
that Nietzsche's teaching was always meant by him to be esoteric and for
higher man alone.

Par. 9.

In the last verse, here, another shaft of light is thrown upon the
Immaculate Perception or so-called "pure objectivity" of the scientific
mind.  "Freedom from fever is still far from being knowledge."  Where a
man's emotions cease to accompany him in his investigations, he is not
necessarily nearer the truth.  Says Spencer, in the Preface to his
Autobiography:--"In the genesis of a system of thought, the emotional
nature is a large factor:  perhaps as large a factor as the intellectual
nature" (see pages 134, 141 of Vol. I., "Thoughts out of Season").

Pars. 10, 11.

When we approach Nietzsche's philosophy we must be prepared to be
independent thinkers; in fact, the greatest virtue of his works is perhaps
the subtlety with which they impose the obligation upon one of thinking
alone, of scoring off one's own bat, and of shifting intellectually for
oneself.

Par. 13.

"I am a railing alongside the torrent; whoever is able to grasp me, may
grasp me!  Your crutch, however, I am not."  These two paragraphs are an
exhortation to higher men to become independent.

Par. 15.

Here Nietzsche perhaps exaggerates the importance of heredity.  As,
however, the question is by no means one on which we are all agreed, what
he says is not without value.

A very important principle in Nietzsche's philosophy is enunciated in the
first verse of this paragraph.  "The higher its type, always the seldomer
doth a thing succeed" (see page 82 of "Beyond Good and Evil").  Those who,
like some political economists, talk in a business-like way about the
terrific waste of human life and energy, deliberately overlook the fact
that the waste most to be deplored usually occurs among higher individuals.
Economy was never precisely one of nature's leading principles.  All this
sentimental wailing over the larger proportion of failures than successes
in human life, does not seem to take into account the fact that it is the
rarest thing on earth for a highly organised being to attain to the fullest
development and activity of all its functions, simply because it is so
highly organised.  The blind Will to Power in nature therefore stands in
urgent need of direction by man.

Pars. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

These paragraphs deal with Nietzsche's protest against the democratic
seriousness (Pobelernst) of modern times.  "All good things laugh," he
says, and his final command to the higher men is, "LEARN, I pray you--to
laugh."  All that is GOOD, in Nietzsche's sense, is cheerful.  To be able
to crack a joke about one's deepest feelings is the greatest test of their
value.  The man who does not laugh, like the man who does not make faces,
is already a buffoon at heart.

"What hath hitherto been the greatest sin here on earth?  Was it not the
word of him who said:  'Woe unto them that laugh now!'  Did he himself find
no cause for laughter on the earth?  Then he sought badly.  A child even
findeth cause for it."

Chapter LXXIV.  The Song of Melancholy.

After his address to the higher men, Zarathustra goes out into the open to
recover himself.  Meanwhile the magician (Wagner), seizing the opportunity
in order to draw them all into his net once more, sings the Song of
Melancholy.

Chapter LXXV.  Science.

The only one to resist the "melancholy voluptuousness" of his art, is the
spiritually conscientious one--the scientific specialist of whom we read in
the discourse entitled "The Leech".  He takes the harp from the magician
and cries for air, while reproving the musician in the style of "The Case
of Wagner".  When the magician retaliates by saying that the spiritually
conscientious one could have understood little of his song, the latter
replies:  "Thou praisest me in that thou separatest me from thyself."  The
speech of the scientific man to his fellow higher men is well worth
studying.  By means of it, Nietzsche pays a high tribute to the honesty of
the true specialist, while, in representing him as the only one who can
resist the demoniacal influence of the magician's music, he elevates him at
a stroke, above all those present.  Zarathustra and the spiritually
conscientious one join issue at the end on the question of the proper place
of "fear" in man's history, and Nietzsche avails himself of the opportunity
in order to restate his views concerning the relation of courage to
humanity.  It is precisely because courage has played the most important
part in our development that he would not see it vanish from among our
virtues to-day.  "...courage seemeth to me the entire primitive history of
man."

Chapter LXXVI.  Among the Daughters of the Desert.

This tells its own tale.