

Chapter LI.  On Passing-by.

Here we find Nietzsche confronted with his extreme opposite, with him
therefore for whom he is most frequently mistaken by the unwary.
"Zarathustra's ape" he is called in the discourse. He is one of those at
whose hands Nietzsche had to suffer most during his life-time, and at whose
hands his philosophy has suffered most since his death. In this respect it
may seem a little trivial to speak of extremes meeting; but it is
wonderfully apt. Many have adopted Nietzsche's mannerisms and
word-coinages, who had nothing in common with him beyond the ideas and
"business" they plagiarised; but the superficial observer and a large
portion of the public, not knowing of these things,--not knowing perhaps
that there are iconoclasts who destroy out of love and are therefore
creators, and that there are others who destroy out of resentment and
revengefulness and who are therefore revolutionists and anarchists,--are
prone to confound the two, to the detriment of the nobler type.

If we now read what the fool says to Zarathustra, and note the tricks of
speech he has borrowed from him:  if we carefully follow the attitude he
assumes, we shall understand why Zarathustra finally interrupts him.  "Stop
this at once," Zarathustra cries, "long have thy speech and thy species
disgusted me...Out of love alone shall my contempt and my warning bird take
wing; BUT NOT OUT OF THE SWAMP!"  It were well if this discourse were taken
to heart by all those who are too ready to associate Nietzsche with lesser
and noiser men,--with mountebanks and mummers.

Chapter LII.  The Apostates.

It is clear that this applies to all those breathless and hasty "tasters of
everything," who plunge too rashly into the sea of independent thought and
"heresy," and who, having miscalculated their strength, find it impossible
to keep their head above water.  "A little older, a little colder," says
Nietzsche.  They soon clamber back to the conventions of the age they
intended reforming.  The French then say "le diable se fait hermite," but
these men, as a rule, have never been devils, neither do they become
angels; for, in order to be really good or evil, some strength and deep
breathing is required.  Those who are more interested in supporting
orthodoxy than in being over nice concerning the kind of support they give
it, often refer to these people as evidence in favour of the true faith.