

Chapter LXIX.  The Shadow.

Here we have a description of that courageous and wayward spirit that
literally haunts the footsteps of every great thinker and every great
leader; sometimes with the result that it loses all aims, all hopes, and
all trust in a definite goal.  It is the case of the bravest and most
broad-minded men of to-day.  These literally shadow the most daring
movements in the science and art of their generation; they completely lose
their bearings and actually find themselves, in the end, without a way, a
goal, or a home.  "On every surface have I already sat!...I become thin, I
am almost equal to a shadow!"  At last, in despair, such men do indeed cry
out:  "Nothing is true; all is permitted," and then they become mere
wreckage.  "Too much hath become clear unto me:  now nothing mattereth to
me any more.  Nothing liveth any longer that I love,--how should I still
love myself!  Have I still a goal?  Where is MY home?"  Zarathustra
realises the danger threatening such a man.  "Thy danger is not small, thou
free spirit and wanderer," he says.  "Thou hast had a bad day.  See that a
still worse evening doth not overtake thee!"  The danger Zarathustra refers
to is precisely this, that even a prison may seem a blessing to such a man.
At least the bars keep him in a place of rest; a place of confinement, at
its worst, is real.  "Beware lest in the end a narrow faith capture thee,"
says Zarathustra, "for now everything that is narrow and fixed seduceth and
tempteth thee."

Chapter LXX.  Noontide.

At the noon of life Nietzsche said he entered the world; with him man came
of age.  We are now held responsible for our actions; our old guardians,
the gods and demi-gods of our youth, the superstitions and fears of our
childhood, withdraw; the field lies open before us; we lived through our
morning with but one master--chance--; let us see to it that we MAKE our
afternoon our own (see Note XLIX., Part III.).

Chapter LXXI.  The Greeting.

Here I think I may claim that my contention in regard to the purpose and
aim of the whole of Nietzsche's philosophy (as stated at the beginning of
my Notes on Part IV.) is completely upheld.  He fought for "all who do not
want to live, unless they learn again to HOPE--unless THEY learn (from him)
the GREAT hope!"  Zarathustra's address to his guests shows clearly enough
how he wished to help them:  "I DO NOT TREAT MY WARRIORS INDULGENTLY," he
says:  "how then could ye be fit for MY warfare?"  He rebukes and spurns
them, no word of love comes from his lips.  Elsewhere he says a man should
be a hard bed to his friend, thus alone can he be of use to him.  Nietzsche
would be a hard bed to higher men.  He would make them harder; for, in
order to be a law unto himself, man must possess the requisite hardness.
"I wait for higher ones, stronger ones, more triumphant ones, merrier ones,
for such as are built squarely in body and soul."  He says in par. 6 of
"Higher Man":--

"Ye higher men, think ye that I am here to put right what ye have put
wrong?  Or that I wished henceforth to make snugger couches for you
sufferers?  Or show you restless, miswandering, misclimbing ones new and
easier footpaths?"

"Nay!  Nay!  Three times nay!  Always more, always better ones of your type
shall succumb--for ye shall always have it worse and harder."

Chapter LXXII.  The Supper.

In the first seven verses of this discourse, I cannot help seeing a gentle
allusion to Schopenhauer's habits as a bon-vivant.  For a pessimist, be it
remembered, Schopenhauer led quite an extraordinary life.  He ate well,
loved well, played the flute well, and I believe he smoked the best cigars.
What follows is clear enough.