

Chapter LXVIII.  The Voluntary Beggar.

In this discourse, we undoubtedly have the ideal Buddhist, if not Gautama
Buddha himself.  Nietzsche had the greatest respect for Buddhism, and
almost wherever he refers to it in his works, it is in terms of praise.  He
recognised that though Buddhism is undoubtedly a religion for decadents,
its decadent values emanate from the higher and not, as in Christianity,
from the lower grades of society.  In Aphorism 20 of "The Antichrist", he
compares it exhaustively with Christianity, and the result of his
investigation is very much in favour of the older religion.  Still, he
recognised a most decided Buddhistic influence in Christ's teaching, and
the words in verses 29, 30, and 31 are very reminiscent of his views in
regard to the Christian Savior.

The figure of Christ has been introduced often enough into fiction, and
many scholars have undertaken to write His life according to their own
lights, but few perhaps have ever attempted to present Him to us bereft of
all those characteristics which a lack of the sense of harmony has attached
to His person through the ages in which His doctrines have been taught.
Now Nietzsche disagreed entirely with Renan's view, that Christ was "le
grand maitre en ironie"; in Aphorism 31 of "The Antichrist", he says that
he (Nietzsche) always purged his picture of the Humble Nazarene of all
those bitter and spiteful outbursts which, in view of the struggle the
first Christians went through, may very well have been added to the
original character by Apologists and Sectarians who, at that time, could
ill afford to consider nice psychological points, seeing that what they
needed, above all, was a wrangling and abusive deity.  These two
conflicting halves in the character of the Christ of the Gospels, which no
sound psychology can ever reconcile, Nietzsche always kept distinct in his
own mind; he could not credit the same man with sentiments sometimes so
noble and at other times so vulgar, and in presenting us with this new
portrait of the Saviour, purged of all impurities, Nietzsche rendered
military honours to a foe, which far exceed in worth all that His most
ardent disciples have ever claimed for Him.  In verse 26 we are vividly
reminded of Herbert Spencer's words "'Le mariage de convenance' is
legalised prostitution."