
CHAPTER  IV.

OF DRAWBACKS.

Merchants and manufacturers are not contented with the monopoly
of the home market, but desire likewise the most extensive
foreign sale for their goods. Their country has no jurisdiction
in foreign nations, and therefore can seldom procure them any
monopoly there. They are generally obliged, therefore, to content
themselves with petitioning for certain encouragements to
exportation.

Of these encouragements, what are called drawbacks seem to be the
most reasonable. To allow the merchant to draw back upon
exportation, either the whole, or a part of whatever excise or
inland duty is imposed upon domestic industry, can never occasion
the exportation of a greater quantity of goods than what would
have been exported had no duty been imposed. Such encouragements
do not tend to turn towards any particular employment a greater
share of the capital of the country, than what would go to that
employment of its own accord, but only to hinder the duty from
driving away any part of that share to other employments. They
tend not to overturn that balance which naturally establishes
itself among all the various employments of the society, but to
hinder it from being overturned by the duty. They tend not to
destroy, but to preserve, what it is in most cases advantageous
to preserve, the natural division and distribution of labour in
the society.

The same thing may be said of the drawbacks upon the
re-exportation of foreign goods imported, which, in Great
Britain, generally amount to by much the largest part of the duty
upon importation. By the second of the rules, annexed to the act
of parliament, which imposed what is now called the old subsidy,
every merchant, whether English or alien. was allowed to draw
back half that duty upon exportation ; the English merchant,
provided the exportation took place within twelve months; the
alien, provided it took place within nine months. Wines,
currants, and wrought silks, were the only goods which did not
fall within this rule, having other and more advantageous
allowances. The duties imposed by this act of parliament were, at
that time, the only duties upon the importation of foreign goods.
The term within which this, and all other drawbacks could be
claimed, was afterwards (by 7 Geo. I. chap. 21. sect. 10.)
extended to three years.

The duties which have been imposed since the old subsidy, are,
the greater part of them, wholly drawn back upon exportation.
This general rule, however, is liable to a great number of
exceptions; and the doctrine of drawbacks has become a much less
simple matter than it was at their first institution.

Upon the exportation of some foreign goods, of which it was
expected that the importation would greatly exceed what was
necessary for the home consumption, the whole duties are drawn
back, without retaining even half the old subsidy. Before the
revolt of our North American colonies, we had the monopoly of the
tobacco of Maryland and Virginia. We imported about ninety-six
thousand hogsheads, and the home consumption was not supposed to
exceed fourteen thousand. To facilitate the great exportation
which was necessary, in order to rid us of the rest, the whole
duties were drawn back, provided the exportation took place
within three years.

We still have, though not altogether, yet very nearly, the
monopoly of the sugars of our West Indian islands. If sugars are
exported within a year, therefore, all the duties upon
importation are drawn back; and if exported within three years,
all the duties, except half the old subsidy, which still
continues to be retained upon the exportation of the greater part
of goods. Though the importation of sugar exceeds a good deal
what is necessary for the home consumption, the excess is
inconsiderable, in comparison of what it used to be in tobacco.

Some goods, the particular objects of the jealousy of our own
manufacturers, are prohibited to be imported for home
consumption. They may, however, upon paying certain duties,be
imported and warehoused for exportation. But upon such
exportation no part of these duties is drawn back. Our
manufacturers are unwilling, it seems, that even this restricted
importation should be encouraged, and are afraid lest some part
of these goods should be stolen out of the warehouse, and thus
come into competition with their own. It is under these
regulations only that we can import wrought silks, French
cambrics and lawns, calicoes, painted, printed, stained, or dyed,
etc.

We are unwilling even to be the carriers of French goods, and
choose rather to forego a profit to ourselves than to suffer
those whom we consider as our enemies to make any profit by our
means. Not only half the old subsidy, but the second twenty-five
per cent. is retained upon the exportation of all French goods.

By the fourth of the rules annexed to the old subsidy, the
drawback allowed upon the exportation of all wines amounted to a
great deal more than half the duties which were at that time paid
upon their importation ; and it seems at that time to have been
the object of the legislature to give somewhat more than ordinary
encouragement to the carrying trade in wine. Several of the other
duties, too which were imposed either at the same time or
subsequent to the old subsidy, what is called the additional
duty, the new subsidy, the one-third and two-thirds subsidies,
the impost 1692, the tonnage on wine, were allowed to be wholly
drawn back upon exportation. All those duties, however, except
the additional duty and impost 1692, being paid down in ready
money upon importation, the interest of so large a sum occasioned
an expense, which made it unreasonable to expect any profitable
carrying trade in this article. Only a part, therefore of the
duty called the impost on wine, and no part of the twenty-five
pounds the ton upon French wines, or of the duties imposed in
1745, in 1763, and in 1778, were allowed to be drawn back upon
exportation. The two imposts of five per cent. imposed in 1779
and 1781, upon all the former duties of customs, being allowed to
be wholly drawn back upon the exportation of all other goods,
were likewise allowed to be drawn back upon that of wine. The
last duty that has been particularly imposed upon wine, that of
1780, is allowed to be wholly drawn back ; an indulgence which,
when so many heavy duties are retained, most probably could never
occasion the exportation of a single ton of wine. These rules
took place with regard to all places of lawful exportation,
except the British colonies in America.

The 15th Charles II, chap. 7, called an act for the encouragement
of trade, had given Great Britain the monopoly of supplying the
colonies with all the commodities of the growth or manufacture of
Europe, and consequently with wines. In a country of so extensive
a coast as our North American and West Indian colonies, where our
authority was always so very slender, and where the inhabitants
were allowed to carry out in their own ships their non-enumerated
commodities, at first to all parts of Europe, and afterwards to
all parts of Europe south of Cape Finisterre, it is not very
probable that this monopoly could ever be much respected ; and
they probably at all times found means of bringing back some
cargo from the countries to which they were allowed to carry out
one. They seem, however, to have found some difficulty in
importing European wines from the places of their growth; and
they could not well import them from Great Britain, where they
were loaded with many heavy duties, of which a considerable part
was not drawn back upon exportation. Madeira wine, not being an
European commodity, could be imported directly into America and
the West Indies, countries which, in all their non-enumerated
commodities, enjoyed a free trade to the island of Madeira. These
circumstances had probably introduced that general taste for
Madeira wine, which our officers found established in all our
colonies at the commencement of the war which began in 1755, and
which they brought back with them to the mother country, where
that wine had not been much in fashion before. Upon the
conclusion of that war, in 1763 (by the 4th Geo. III, chap. 15,
sect. 12), all the duties except 3, 10s. were allowed to be
drawn back upon the exportation to the colonies of all wines.
except French wines, to the commerce and consumption of which
national prejudice would allow no sort of encouragement. The
period between the granting of this indulgence and the revolt of
our North American colonies, was probably too short to admit of
any considerable change in the customs of those countries.

The same act which, in the drawbacks upon all wines, except
French wines, thus favoured the colonies so much more than other
countries, in those upon the greater part of other commodities,
favoured them much less. Upon the exportation of the greater part
of commodities to other countries, half the old subsidy was drawn
back. But this law enacted, that no part of that duty should be
drawn back upon the exportation to the colonies of any
commodities of the growth or manufacture either of Europe or the
East Indies, except wines, white calicoes, and muslins.

Drawbacks were, perhaps, originally granted for the encouragement
of the carrying trade, which, as the freight of the ship is
frequently paid by foreigners in money, was supposed to be
peculiarly fitted for bringing gold and silver into the country.
But though the carrying trade certainly deserves no peculiar
encouragement, though the motive of the institution was, perhaps,
abundantly foolish, the institution itself seems reasonable
enough. Such drawbacks cannot force into this trade a greater
share of the capital of the country than what would have gone to
it of its own accord, had there been no duties upon importation;
they only prevent its being excluded altogether by those duties.
The carrying trade, though it deserves no preference, ought not
to be precluded, but to be left free, like all other trades. It
is a necessary resource to those capitals which cannot find
employment, either in the agriculture or in the manufactures of
the country, either in its home trade, or in its foreign trade of
consumption.

The revenue of the customs, instead of suffering, profits from
such drawbacks, by that part of the duty which is retained. If
the whole duties had been retained, the foreign goods upon which
they are paid could seldom have been exported, nor consequently
imported, for want of a market. The duties, therefore, of which a
part is retained, would never have been paid.

These reasons seem sufficiently to justify drawbacks, and would
justify them, though the whole duties, whether upon the produce
of domestic industry or upon foreign goods, were always drawn
back upon exportation. The revenue of excise would, in this case
indeed, suffer a little, and that of the customs a good deal
more; but the natural balance of industry, the natural division
and distribution of labour, which is always more or less
disturbed by such duties, would be more nearly re-established by
such a regulation.

These reasons, however, will justify drawbacks only upon
exporting goods to those countries which are altogether foreign
and independent, not to those in which our merchants and
manufacturers enjoy a monopoly. A drawback, for example, upon the
exportation of European goods to our American colonies, will not
always occasion a greater exportation than what would have taken
place without it. By means of the monopoly which our merchants
and manufacturers enjoy there, the same quantity might
frequently, perhaps, be sent thither, though the whole duties
were retained. The drawback, therefore, may frequently be pure
loss to the revenue of excise and customs, without altering the
state of the trade, or rendering it in any respect more
extensive. How far such drawbacks can be justified as a proper
encouragement to the industry of our colonies, or how far it is
advantageous to the mother country that they should be exempted
from taxes which are paid by all the rest of their
fellow-subjects, will appear hereafter, when I come to treat of
colonies.

Drawbacks, however, it must always be understood, are useful only
in those cases in which the goods, for the exportation of which
they are given, are really exported to some foreign country, and
not clandestinely re-imported into our own. That some drawbacks,
particularly those upon tobacco, have frequently been abused in
this manner, and have given occasion to many frauds, equally
hurtful both to the revenue and to the fair trader, is well
known.




CHAPTER   V.

OF BOUNTIES.

Bounties upon exportation are, in Great Britain, frequently
petitioned for, and sometimes granted, to the produce of
particular branches of domestic industry. By means of them, our
merchants and manufacturers, it is pretended, will be enabled to
sell their goods as cheap or cheaper than their rivals in the
foreign market. A greater quantity, it is said, will thus be
exported, and the balance of trade consequently turned more in
favour of our own country. We cannot give our workmen a monopoly
in the foreign, as we have done in the home market. We cannot
force foreigners to buy their goods, as we have done our own
countrymen. The next best expedient, it has been thought,
therefore, is to pay them for buying. It is in this manner that
the mercantile system proposes to enrich the whole country, and
to put money into all our pockets, by means of the balance of
trade.

Bounties, it is allowed, ought to be given to those branches of
trade only which cannot be carried on without them. But every
branch of trade in which the merchant can sell his goods for a
price which replaces to him, with the ordinary profits of stock,
the whole capital employed in preparing and sending them to
market, can be carried on without a bounty. Every such branch is
evidently upon a level with all the other branches of trade which
are carried on without bounties, and cannot, therefore, require
one more than they. Those trades only require bounties, in which
the merchant is obliged to sell his goods for a price which does
not replace to him his capital, together with the ordinary
profit, or in which he is obliged to sell them for less than it
really cost him to send them to market. The bounty is given in
order to make up this loss, and to encourage him to continue, or,
perhaps, to begin a trade, of which the expense is supposed to be
greater than the returns, of which every operation eats up a part
of the capital employed in it, and which is of such a nature,
that if all other trades resembled it, there would soon be no
capital left in the country.

The trades, it is to be observed, which are carried on by means
of bounties, are the only ones which can be carried on between
two nations for any considerable time together, in such a manner
as that one of them shall alway's and regularly lose, or sell its
goods for less than it really cost to send them to market. But if
the bounty did not repay to the merchant what he would otherwise
lose upon the price of his goods, his own interest would soon
oblige him to employ his stock in another way, or to find out a
trade in which the price of the goods would replace to him, with
the ordinary profit, the capital employed in sending them to
market. The effect of bounties, like that of all the other
expedients of the mercantile system, can only be to force the
trade of a country into a channel much less advantageous than
that in which it would naturally run of its own accord.

The ingenious and well-informed author of the Tracts upon the
Corn Trade has shown very clearly, that since the bounty upon the
exportation of corn was first established, the price of the corn
exported, valued moderately enough, has exceeded that of the corn
imported, valued very high, by a much greater sum than the amount
of the whole bounties which have been paid during that period.
This, he imagines, upon the true principles of the mercantile
system, is a clear proof that this forced corn trade is
beneficial to the nation, the value of the exportation exceeding
that of the importation by a much greater sum than the whole
extraordinary expense which the public has been at in order to
get it exported. He does not consider that this extraordinary
expense, or the bounty, is the smallest part of the expense which
the exportation of corn really costs the society. The capital
which the farmer employed in raising it must likewise be taken
into the account. Unless the price of the corn, when sold in the
foreign markets, replaces not only the bounty, but this capital,
together with the ordinary profits of stock, the society is a
loser by the difference, or the national stock is so much
diminished. But the very reason for which it has been thought
necessary to grant a bounty, is the supposed insufficiency of the
price to do this.

The average price of corn, it has been said, has fallen
considerably since the establishment of the bounty. That the
average price of corn began to fall somewhat towards the end of
the last century, and has continued to do so during the course of
the sixty-four first years of the present, I have already
endeavoured to show. But this event, supposing it to be real, as
I believe it to be, must have happened in spite of the bounty,
and cannot possibly have happened in consequence of it. It has
happened in France, as well as in England, though in France there
was not only no bounty, but, till 1764, the exportation of corn
was subjected to a general prohibition. This gradual fall in the
average price of grain, it is probable, therefore, is ultimately
owing neither to the one regulation nor to the other, but to that
gradual and insensible rise in the real value of silver, which,
in the first book of this discourse, I have endeavoured to show,
has taken place in the general market of Europe during the course
of the present century. It seems to be altogether impossible that
the bounty could ever contribute to lower the price of grain.

In years of plenty, it has already been observed, the bounty, by
occasioning an extraordinary exportation, necessarily keeps up
the price of corn in the home market above what it would
naturally fall to. To do so was the avowed purpose of the
institution. In years of scarcity, though the bounty is
frequently suspended, yet the great exportation which it
occasions in years of plenty, must frequently hinder, more or
less, the plenty of one year from relieving the scarcity of
another. Both in years of plenty and in years of scarcity,
therefore, the bounty necessarily tends to raise the money price
of corn somewhat higher than it otherwise would be in the home
market.

 That in the actual state of tillage the bounty must necessarily
have this tendency, will not, I apprehend, be disputed by any
reasonable person. But it has been thought by many people, that
it tends to encourage tillage, and that in two different ways ;
first, by opening a more extensive foreign market to the corn of
the farmer, it tends, they imagine, to increase the demand for,
and consequently the production of, that commodity; and, secondly
by securing to him a better price than he could otherwise expect
in the actual state of tillage, it tends, they suppose, to
encourage tillage. This double encouragement must they imagine,
in a long period of years, occasion such an increase in the
production of corn, as may lower its price in the home market,
much more than the bounty can raise it in the actual state which
tillage may, at the end of that period, happen to be in.

I answer, that whatever extension of the foreign market can be
occasioned by the bounty must, in every particular year, be
altogether at the expense of the home market ; as every bushel of
corn, which is exported by means of the bounty, and which would
not have been exported without the bounty, would have remained in
the home market to increase the consumption, and to lower the
price of that commodity. The corn bounty, it is to be observed,
as well as every other bounty upon exportation, imposes two
different taxes upon the people; first, the tax which they are
obliged to contribute, in order to pay the bounty ; and,
secondly, the tax which arises from the advanced price of the
commodity in the home market, and which, as the whole body of the
people are purchasers of corn, must, in this particular
commodity, be paid by the whole body of the people. In this
particular commodity, therefore, this second tax is by much the
heaviest of the two. Let us suppose that, taking one year with
another, the bounty of 5s. upon the exportation of the quarter of
wheat raises the price of that commodity in the home market only
6d. the bushel, or 4s. the quarter higher than it otherwise would
have been in the actual state of the crop. Even upon this very
moderate supposition, the great body of the people, over and
above contributing the tax which pays the bounty of 5s. upon
every quarter of wheat exported, must pay another of 4s. upon
every quarter which they themselves consume. But according to the
very well informed author of the Tracts upon the Corn Trade, the
average proportion of the corn exported to that consumed at home,
is not more than that of one to thirty-one. For every 5s.
therefore, which they contribute to the payment of the first tax,
they must contribute 6:4s. to the payment of the second. So very
heavy a tax upon the first necessary of life-must either reduce
the subsistence of the labouring poor, or it must occasion some
augmentation in their pecuniary wages, proportionable to that in
the pecuniary price of their subsistence. So far as it operates
in the one way, it must reduce the ability of the labouring poor
to educate and bring up their children, and must, so far, tend to
restrain the population of the country. So far as it operate's in
the other, it must reduce the ability of the employers of the
poor, to employ so great a number as they otherwise might do, and
must so far tend to restrain the industry of the country. The
extraordinary exportation of corn, therefore occasioned by the
bounty, not only in every particular year diminishes the home,
just as much as it extends the foreign market and consumption,
but, by restraining the population and industry of the country,
its final tendency is to stint and restrain the gradual extension
of the home market ; and thereby, in the long-run, rather to
diminish than to augment the whole market and consumption of
corn.

This enhancement of the money price of corn, however, it has been
thought, by rendering that commodity more profitable to the
farmer, must necessarily encourage its production.

I answer, that this might be the case, if the effect of the
bounty was to raise the real price of corn, or to enable the
farmer, with an equal quantity of it, to maintain a greater
number of labourers in the same manner, whether liberal,
moderate, or scanty, than other labourers are commonly maintained
in his neighbourhood. But neither the bounty, it is evident, nor
any other human institution, can have any such effect. It is not
the real, but the nominal price of corn, which can in any
considerable degree be affected by the bounty. And though the
tax, which that institution imposes upon the whole body of the
people, may be very burdensome to those who pay it, it is of very
little advantage to those who receive it.

The real effect of the bounty is not so much to raise the real
value of corn, as to degrade the real value of silver ; or to
make an equal quantity of it exchange for a smaller quantity, not
only of corn, but of all other home made commodities; for the
money price of corn regulates that of all other home made
commodities.

It regulates the money price of labour, which must always be such
as to enable the labourer to purchase a quantity of corn
sufficient to maintain him and his family, either in the liberal,
moderate, or scanty manner, in which the advancing, stationary,
or declining, circumstances of the society, oblige his employers
to maintain him.

It regulates the money price of all the other parts of the rude
produce of land, which, in every period of improvement, must bear
a certain proportion to that of corn, though this proportion is
different in different periods. It regulates, for example, the
money price of grass and hay, of butcher's meat, of horses, and
the maintenance of horses, of land carriage consequently, or of
the greater part of the inland commerce of the country.

By regulating the money price of all the other parts of the rude
produce of land, it regulates that of the materials of almost all
manufactures; by regulating the money price of labour, it
regulates that of manufacturing art and industry ; and by
regulating both, it regulates that of the complete manufacture.
The money price of labour, and of every thing that is the
produce, either of land or labour, must necessarily either rise
or fall in proportion to the money price of corn.

Though in consequence of the bounty, therefore, the farmer should
be enabled to sell his corn for 4s. the bushel, instead of 3s:6d.
and to pay his landlord a money rent proportionable to this rise
in the money price of his produce; yet if, in consequence of this
rise in the price of corn, 4s. will purchase no more home made
goods of any other kind than 3s. 6d. would have done before,
neither the circumstances of the farmer, nor those of the
landlord, will be much mended by this change. The farmer will not
be able to cultivate much better ; the landlord will not be able
to live much better. In the purchase of foreign commodities, this
enhancement in the price of corn may give them some little
advantage. In that of home made commodities, it can give them
none at all. And almost the whole expense of the farmer, and the
far greater part even of that of the landlord, is in home made
commodities.

That degradation in the value of silver, which is the effect of
the fertility of the mines, and which operates equally, or very
nearly equally, through the greater part of the commercial world,
is a matter of very little consequence to any particular country.
The consequent rise of all money prices, though it does not make
those who receive them really richer, does not make them really
poorer. A service of plate becomes really cheaper, and every
thing else remains precisely of the same real value as before.

But that degradation in the value of silver, which, being the
effect either of the peculiar situation or of the political
institutions of a particular country, takes place only in that
country, is a matter of very great consequence, which, far from
tending to make anybody really richer, tends to make every body
really poorer. The rise in the money price of all commodities,
which is in this case peculiar to that country, tends to
discourage more or less every sort of industry which is carried
on within it, and to enable foreign nations, by furnishing almost
all sorts of goods for a smaller quantity of silver than its own
workmen can afford to do, to undersell them, not only in the
foreign, but even in the home market.

It is the peculiar situation of Spain and Portugal, as
proprietors of the mines. to be the distributers of gold and
silver to all the other countries of Europe. Those metals ought
naturally, therefore, to be somewhat cheaper in Spain and
Portugal than in any other part of Europe. The difference, how.
ever, should be no more than the amount of the freight and
insurance ; and, on account of the great value and small bulk of
those metals, their freight is no great matter, and their
insurance is the same as that of any other goods of equal value.
Spain and Portugal, therefore, could suffer very little from
their peculiar situation, if they did not aggravate its
disadvantages by their political institutions.

Spain by taxing, and Portugal by prohibiting, the exportation of
gold and silver, load that exportation with the expense of
smuggling, and raise the value of those metals in other countries
so much more above what it is in their own, by the whole amount
of this expense. When you dam up a stream of water, as soon as
the dam is full, as much water must run over the dam-head as if
there was no dam at all. The prohibition of exportation cannot
detain a greater quantity of gold and silver in Spain and
Portugal, than what they can afford to employ, than what the
annual produce of their land and labour will allow them to
employ, in coin, plate, gilding, and other ornaments of gold and
silver. When they have got this quantity, the dam is full, and
the whole stream which flows in afterwards must run over. The
annual exportation of gold and silver from Spain and Portugal,
accordingly, is, by all accounts, notwithstanding these
restraints, very near equal to the whole annual importation. As
the water, however, must always be deeper behind the dam-head
than before it, so the quantity of gold and silver which these
restraints detain in Spain and Portugal, must, in proportion to
the annual produce of their land and labour, be greater than what
is to be found in other countries. The higher and stronger the
dam-head, the greater must be the difference in the depth of
water behind and before it. The higher the tax, the higher the
penalties with which the prohibition is guarded, the more
vigilant and severe the police which looks after the execution of
the law, the greater must be the difference in the proportion of
gold and silver to the annual produce of the land and labour of
Spain and Portugal, and to that of other countries. It is said,
accordingly, to be very considerable, and that you frequently
find there a profusion of plate in houses, where there is nothing
else which would in other countries be thought suitable or
correspondent to this sort of magnificence. The cheapness of gold
and silver, or, what is the same thing, the dearness of all
commodities, which is the necessary effect of this redundancy of
the precious metals, discourages both the agriculture and
manufactures of Spain and Portugal, and enables foreign nations
to supply them with many sorts of rude, and with almost all sorts
of manufactured produce, for a smaller quantity of gold and
silver than what they themselves can either raise or make them
for at home. The tax and prohibition operate in two different
ways. They not only lower very much the value of the precious
metals in Spain and Portugal, but by detaining there a certain
quantity of those metals which would otherwise flow over other
countries, they keep up their value in those other countries
somewhat above what it otherwise would be, and thereby give those
countries a double advantage in their commerce with Spain and
Portugal. Open the flood-gates, and there will presently be less
water above, and more below the dam-head, and it will soon come
to a level in both places. Remove the tax and the prohibition,
and as the quantity of gold and silver will diminish considerably
in Spain and Portugal, so it will increase somewhat in other
countries ; and the value of those metals, their proportion to
the annual produce of land and labour, will soon come to a level,
or very near to a level, in all. The loss which Spain and
Portugal could sustain by this exportation of their gold and
silver, would be altogether nominal and imaginary. The nominal
value of their goods, and of the annual produce of their land and
labour, would fall, and would be expressed or represented by a
smaller quantity of silver than before; but their real value
would be the same as before, and would be sufficient to maintain,
command, and employ the same quantity of labour. As the nominaly
value of their goods would fall, the real value of what remained
of their gold and silver would rise, and a smaller quantity of
those metals would answer all the same purposes of commerce and
circulation which had employed a greater quantity before. The
gold and silver which would go abroad would not go abroad for
nothing, but would bring back an equal value of goods of some
kind or other. Those goods, too, would not be all matters of mere
luxury and expense, to be consumed by idle people, who produce
nothing in return for their consumption. As the real wealth and
revenue of idle people would not be augmented by this
extraordinary exportation of gold and silver, so neither would
their consumption be much augmented by it. Those goods would
probably, the greater part of them, and certainly some part of
them, consist in materials, tools, and provisions, for the
employment and maintenance of industrious people, who would
reproduce, with a profit, the full value of their consumption.
A part of the dead stock of the society would thus be turned into
active stock, and would put into motion a greater quantity of
industry than had been employed before. The annual produce of
their land and labour would immediately be augmented a little,
and in a few years would probably be augmented a great deal;
their industry being thus relieved from one of the most
oppressive burdens which it at present labours under.

The bounty upon the exportation of corn necessarily operates
exactly in the same way as this absurd policy of Spain and
Portugal. Whatever be the actual state of tillage, it renders our
corn somewhat dearer in the home market than it otherwise would
be in that state, and somewhat cheaper in the foreign; and as the
average money price of corn regulates, more or less, that of all
other commodities, it lowers the value of silver considerably in
the one, and tends to raise it a little in the other. It enables
foreigners, the Dutch in particular, not only to eat our corn
cheaper than they otherwise could do, but sometimes to eat it
cheaper than even our own people can do upon the same occasions;
as we are assured by an excellent authority, that of Sir Matthew
Decker. It hinders our own workmen from furnishing their goods
for so small a quantity of silver as they otherwise might do, and
enables the Dutch to furnish theirs for a smaller. It tends to
render our manufactures somewhat dearer in every market, and
theirs somewhat cheaper, than they otherwise would be, and
consequently to give their industry a double advantage over our
own.

The bounty, as it raises in the home market, not so much the
real, as the nominal price of our corn; as it augments, not the
quantity of labour which a certain quantity of corn can maintain
and employ, but only the quantity of silver which it will
exchange for ; it discourages our manufactures, without rendering
any considerable service, either to our farmers or country
gentlemen. It puts, indeed, a little more money into the pockets
of both, and it will perhaps be somewhat difficult to persuade
the greater part of them that this is not rendering them a very
considerable service. But if this money sinks in its value, in
the quantity of labour, provisions, and home-made commodities of
all different kinds which it is capable of purchasing, as much as
it rises in its quantity, the service will be little more than
nominal and imaginary.

There is, perhaps, but one set of men in the whole commonwealth
to whom the bounty either was or could be essentially
serviceable. These were the corn merchants, the exporters and
importers of corn. In years of plenty, the bounty necessarily
occasioned a greater exportation than would otherwise have taken
place ; and by hindering the plenty of the one year from
relieving the scarcity of another, it occasioned in years of
scarcity a greater importation than would otherwise have been
necessary. It increased the business of the corn merchant in
both; and in the years of scarcity, it not only enabled him to
import a greater quantity, but to sell it for a better price, and
consequently with a greater profit, than he could otherwise have
made, if the plenty of one year had not been more or less
hindered from relieving the scarcity of another. It is in this
set of men, accordingly, that I have observed the greatest zeal
for the continuance or renewal of the bounty.

Our country gentlemen, when they imposed the high duties upon the
exportation of foreign corn, which in times of moderate plenty
amount to a prohibition, and when they established the bounty,
seem to have imitated the conduct of our manufacturers. By the
one institution, they secured to themselves the monopoly of the
home market, and by the other they endeavoured to prevent that
market from ever being overstocked with their commodity. By both
they endeavoured to raise its real value, in the same manner as
our manufacturers had, by the like institutions, raised the real
value of many different sorts of manufactured goods. They did
not, perhaps, attend to the great and essential difference which
nature has established between corn and almost every other sort
of goods. When, either by the monopoly of the home market, or by
a bounty upon exportation, you enable our woollen or linen
manufacturers to sell their goods for somewhat a better price
than they otherwise could get for them, you raise, not only the
nominal, but the real price of those goods; you render them
equivalent to a greater quantity of labour and subsistence; you
increase not only the nominal, but the real profit, the real
wealth and revenue of those manufacturers ; and you enable them,
either to live better themselves, or to employ a greater quantity
of labour in those particular manufactures. You really encourage
those manufactures, and direct towards them a greater quantity of
the industry of the country than what would properly go to them
of its own accord. But when, by the like institutions, you raise
the nominal or money price of corn, you do not raise its real
value ; you do not increase the real wealth, the real revenue,
either of our farmers or country gentlemen ; you do not encourage
the growth of corn, because you do not enable them to maintain
and employ more labourers in raising it. The nature of things has
stamped upon corn a real value, which cannot be altered by merely
altering its money price. No bounty upon exportation, no monopoly
of the home market, can raise that value. The freest competition
cannot lower it, Through the world in general, that value is
equal to the quantity of labour which it can maintain, and in
every particular place it is equal to the quantity of labour
which it can maintain in the way, whether liberal, moderate, or
scanty, in which labour is commonly maintained in that place.
Woollen or linen cloth are not the regulating commodities by
which the real value of all other commodities must be finally
measured and determined ; corn is. The real value of every other
commodity is finally measured and detemnined by the proportion
which its average money price bears to the average money price of
corn. The real value of corn does not vary with those variations
in its average money price, which sometimes occur from one
century to another ; it is the real value of silver which varies
with them.

Bounties upon the exportation of any homemade commodity are
liable, first, to that general objection which may be made to all
the different expedients of the mercantile system ; the objection
of forcing some part of the industry of the country into a
channel less advantageous than that in which it would run of its
own accord ; and, secondly, to the particular objection of
forcing it not only into a channel that is less advantageous, but
into one that is actually disadvantageous ; the trade which
cannot be carried on but by means of a bounty being necessarily a
losing trade. The bounty upon the exportation of corn is liable
to this further objection, that it can in no respect promote the
raising of that particular commodity of which it was meant to
encourage the production. When our country gentlemen, therefore,
demanded the establishment of the bounty, though they acted in
imitation of our merchants and manufacturers, they did not act
with that complete comprehension of their own interest, which
commonly directs the conduct of those two other orders of people.
They loaded the public revenue with a very considerable expense:
they imposed a very heavy tax upon the whole body of the people ;
but they did not, in any sensible degree, increase the real value
of their own commodity; and by lowering somewhat the real value
of silver, they discouraged, in some degree, the general industry
of the country, and, instead of advancing, retarded more or less
the improvement of their own lands, which necessarily depend upon
the general industry of the country.

To encourage the production of any commodity, a bounty upon
production, one should imagine, would have a more direct
operation than one upon exportation. It would, besides, impose
only one tax upon the people, that which they must contribute in
order to pay the bounty. Instead of raising, it would tend to
lower the price of the commodity in the home market ; and
thereby, instead of imposing a second tax upon the people, it
might, at least in part, repay them for what they had contributed
to the first. Bounties upon production, however, have been very
rarely granted. The prejudices established by the commercial
system have taught us to believe, that national wealth arises
more immediately from exportation than from production.  It has
been more favoured, accordingly, as the more immediate means of
bringing money into the country. Bounties upon production, it has
been said too, have been found by experience more liable to
frauds than those upon exportation. How far this is true, I know
not. That bounties upon exportation have been abused, to many
fraudulent purposes, is very well known. But it is not the
interest of merchants and manufacturers, the great inventors of
all these expedients, that the home market should be overstocked
with their goods; an event which a bounty upon production might
sometimes occasion. A bounty upon exportation, by enabling them
to send abroad their surplus part, and to keep up the price of
what remains in the home market, effectually prevents this. Of
all the expedients of the mercantile system, accordingly, it is
the one of which they are the fondest. I have known the different
undertakers of some particular works agree privately among
themselves to give a bounty out of their own pockets upon the
exportation of a certain proportion of the goods which they dealt
in. This expedient succeeded so well, that it more than doubled
the price of their goods in the home market, notwithstanding a
very considerable increase in the produce. The operation of the
bounty upon corn must have been wonderfully different, if it has
lowered the money price of that commodity.

Something like a bounty upon production, however, has been
granted upon some particular occasions. The tonnage bounties
given to the white herring and whale fisheries may, perhaps, be
considered as somewhat of this nature. They tend directly, it may
be supposed, to render the goods cheaper in the home market than
they otherwise would be. In other respects, their effects, it
must be acknowledged, are the same as those of bounties upon
exportation. By means of them, a part of the capital of the
country is employed in bringing goods to market, of which the
price does not repay the cost, together with the ordinary profits
of stock.

But though the tonnage bounties to those fisheries do not
contribute to the opulence of the nation, it may, perhaps, be
thought that they contribute to its defence, by augmenting the
number of its sailors and shipping. This, it may be alleged, may
sometimes be done by means of such bounties, at a much smaller
expense than by keeping up a great standing navy, if I may use
such an expression, in the same way as a standing army.

Notwithstanding these favourable allegations, however, the
following considerations dispose me to believe, that in granting
at least one of these bounties, the legislature has been very
grossly imposed upon:

First, The herring-buss bounty seems too large.

From the commencement of the winter fishing 1771, to the end of
the winter fishing 1781, the tonnage bounty upon the herring-buss
fishery has been at thirty shillings the ton. During these eleven
years, the whole number of barrels caught by the herring-buss
fishery of Scotland amounted to 378,347. The herrings caught and
cured at sea are called sea-sticks. In order to render them what
are called merchantable herrings, it is necessary to repack them
with an additional quantity of salt ; and in this case, it is
reckoned, that three barrels of sea-sticks are usually repacked
into two barrels of merchantable herrings. The number of barrels
of merchantable herrings, therefore, caught during these eleven
years, will amount only, according to this account, to 252,231.
During these eleven years, the tonnage bounties paid amounted to
155,463:11s. or 8s:2d. upon every barrel of sea-sticks, and to
12s:3d. upon every barrel of merchantable herrings.

The salt with which these herrings are cured is sometimes Scotch,
and sometimes foreign salt ; both which are delivered, free of
all excise duty, to the fish-curers. The excise duty upon Scotch
salt is at present 1s:6d., that upon foreign salt 10s. the
bushel. A barrel of herrings is supposed to require about one
bushel and one-fourth of a bushel foreign salt. Two bushels are
the supposed average of Scotch salt. If the herrings are entered
for exportation, no part of this duty is paid up; if entered for
home consumption, whether the herrings were cured with foreign or
with Scotch salt, only one shilling the barrel is paid up. It was
the old Scotch duty upon a bushel of salt, the quantity which, at
a low estimation, had been supposed necessary for curing a barrel
of herrings. In Scotland, foreign salt is very little used for
any other purpose but the curing of fish. But from the 5th April
1771 to the 5th April 1782, the quantity of foreign salt imported
amounted to 936,974 bushels, at eighty-four pounds the bushel ;
the quantity of Scotch salt delivered from the works to the
fish-curers, to no more than 168,226, at fifty-six pounds the
bushel only. It would appear, therefore, that it is principally
foreign salt that is used in the fisheries. Upon every barrel of
herrings exported, there is, besides, a bounty of 2s:8d. and more
than two-thirds of the buss-caught herrings are exported. Put all
these things together, and you will find that, during these
eleven years, every barrel of buss-caught herrings, cured with
Scotch salt, when exported, has cost government 17s:11d.; and,
when entered for home consumption, 14s:3d.; and that every
barrel cured with foreign salt, when exported, has cost
government 1:7:5d. ; and, when entered for home consumption,
1:3:9d. The price of a barrel of good merchantable herrings
runs from seventeen and eighteen to four and five-and-twenty
shillings ; about a guinea at an average. {See the accounts at
the end of this Book.}
     Secondly,   The bounty to the white-herring fishery is a
tonnage bounty, and is proportioned to the burden of the ship,
not to her diliglence or success in the fishery ; and it has, I
am afraid, been too common for the vessels to fit out for the
sole purpose of catching, not the fish but the bounty. In the
year 1759, when the bounty was at fifty shillings the ton, the
whole buss fishery of Scotland brought in only four barrels of
sea-sticks. In that year, each barrel of sea-sticks cost
government, in bounties alone, 113:15s.; each barrel of
merchantable herrings 159:7:6.

Thirdly,     The mode of fishing, for which this tonnage bounty
in the white herring fishery has been given (by busses or decked
vessels from twenry to eighty tons burden ), seems not so well
adapted to the situation of Scotland, as to that of Holland, from
the practice of which country it appears to have been borrowed.
Holland lies at a great distance from the seas to which herrings
are known principally to resort, and can, therefore, carry on
that fishery only in decked vessels, which can carry water and
provisions sufficient for a voyage to a distant sea ; but the
Hebrides, or Western Isdands, the islands of Shetland, and the
northern and north-western coasts of Scotland, the countries in
whose neighbourhood the herring fishery is principally carried
on. are everywhere intersected by arms of the sea, which run up a
considerable way into the land, and which, in the language of the
country, are called sea-lochs. It is to these sea-lochs that the
herrings principally resort during the seasons in which they
visit these seas; for the visits of this, and, I am assured, of
many other sorts of fish, are not quite regular and constant. A
boat-fishery, therefore, seems to be the mode of fishing best
adapted to the peculiar situation of Scotland, the fishers
carrying the herrings on shore as fast as they are taken, to he
either cured or consumed fresh. But the great encouragement which
a bounty of 30s. the ton gives to the buss-fishery, is
necessarily a discouragement to the boat-fishery, which, having
no such bounty, cannot bring its cured fish to market upon the
same terms as the buss-fishery. The boat-fishery; accordingly,
which, before the establishment of the buss-bounty, was very
considerable, and is said to have employed a number of seamen,
not inferior to what the buss-fishery employs at present, is now
gone almost entirely to decay. Of the former extent, however, of
this now ruined and abandoned fishery, I must acknowledge that I
cannot pretend to speak with much precision. As no bounty
was-paid upon the outfit of the boat-fishery, no account was
taken of it by the officers of the customs or salt duties.

Fourthly,     In many parts of Scotland, during certain seasons
of the year, herrings make no inconsiderable part of the food of
the common people. A bounty which tended to lower their price in
the home market, might countribute a good deal to the relief of a
great number of our fellow-subjects, whose circumstances are by
no means affuent. But the herring-bus bounty contributes to no
such good purpose. It has ruined the boat fishery, which is by
far the best adapted for the supply of the home market; and the
additional bounty of 2s:8d. the barrel upon exportation, carries
the greater part, more than two-thirds, of the produce of the
buss-fishery abroad. Between thirty and forty years ago, before
the establishment of the buss-bounty, 16s. the barrel, I have
been assured, was the common price of white herrings. Between ten
and fifteen years ago, before the boat-fishery was entirely
ruined, the price was said to have run from seventeen to twenty
shillings the barrel. For these last five years, it has, at an
average, been at twenty-five shillings the barrel. This high
price, however, may have been owing to the real scarcity of the
herrings upon the coast of Scotland. I must observe, too, that
the cask or barrel, which is usually sold with the herrings, and
of which the price is included in all the foregoing prices, has,
since the commencement of the American war, risen to about double
its former price, or from about 3s. to about 6s. I must likewise
observe, that the accounts I have received of the prices of
former times, have been by no means quite uniform and consistent,
and an old man of great accuracy and experience has assured me,
that, more than fifty years ago, a guinea was the usual price of
a barrel of good merchantable herrings; and this, I imagine, may
still be looked upon as the average price. All accounts, however,
I think, agree that the price has not been lowered in the home
market in consequence of the buss-bounty.

When the undertakers of fisheries, after such liberal bounties
have been bestowed upon them, continue to sell their commodity at
the same, or even at a higher price than they were accustomed to
do before, it might be expected that their profits should be very
great ; and it is not improbable that those of some individuals
may have been so. In general, however, I have every reason to
believe they have been quite otherwise. The usual effect of such
bounties is, to encourage rash undertakers to adventure in a
business which they do not understand; and what they lose by
their own negligence and ignorance, more than compensates all
that they can gain by the utmost liberality of government. In
1750, by the same act which first gave the bounty of 30s. the ton
for the encouragement of the white herring fishery (the 23d Geo.
II. chap. 24), a joint stock company was erected, with a capital
of 500,000, to which the subscribers (over and above all other
encouragements, the tonnage bounty just now mentioned, the
exportation bounty of 2s:8d. the barrel, the delivery of both
British and foreign salt duty free) were, during the space of
fourteen years, for every hundred pounds which they subscribed
and paid into the stock of the society, entitled to three pounds
a-year, to be paid by the receiver-general of the customs in
equal half-yearly payments. Besides this great company, the
residence of whose governor and directors was to be in London, it
was declared lawful to erect different fishing chambers in all
the different out-ports of the kingdom, provided a sum not less
than 10,000 was subscribed into the capital of each, to be
managed at its own risk, and for its own profit and loss. The
same annuity, and the same encouragements of all kinds, were
given to the trade of those inferior chambers as to that of the
great company. The subscription of the great company was soon
filled up, and several different fishing chambers were erected in
the different out-ports of the kingdom. In spite of all these
encouragements, almost all those different companies, both great
and small, lost either the whole or the greater part of their
capitals; scarce a vestige now remains of any of them, and the
white-herring fishery is now entirely, or almost entirely,
carried on by private adventurers.

If any particular manufacture was necessary, indeed, for the
defence of the society, it might not always be prudent to depend
upon our neighbours for the supply; and if such manufacture could
not otherwise be supported at home, it might not be unreasonable
that all the other branches of industry should be taxed in order
to support it. The bounties upon the exportation of British made
sail-cloth, and British made gunpowder, may, perhaps, both be
vindicated upon this principle.

But though it can very seldom be reasonable to tax the industry
of the great body of the people, in order to support that of some
particular class of manufacturers ; yet, in the wantonness of
great prosperity, when the public enjoys a greater revenue than
it knows well what to do with, to give such bounties to favourite
manufactures, may, perhaps, be as natural as to incur any other
idle expense. In public, as well as in private expenses, great
wealth, may, perhaps, frequently be admitted as an apology for
great folly. But there must surely be something more than
ordinary absurdity in continuing such profusion in times of
general difficulty and distress.

What is called a bounty, is sometimes no more than a drawback,
and, consequently, is not liable to the same objections as what
is properly a bounty. The bounty, for example, upon refined sugar
exported, may be considered as a drawback of the duties upon the
brown and Muscovado sugars, from which it is made; the bounty
upon wrought silk exported, a drawback of the duties upon raw and
thrown silk imported; the bounty upon gunpowder exported, a
drawback of the duties upon brimstone and saltpetre imported. In
the language of the customs, those allowances only are called
drawbacks which are given upon goods exported in the same form in
which they are imported. When that form has been so altered by
manufacture of any kind as to come under a new denomination, they
are called bounties.

Premiums given by the public to artists and manufacturers, who
excel in their particular occupations, are not liable to the same
objections as bounties. By encouraging extraordinary dexterity
and ingenuity, they serve to keep up the emulation of the workmen
actually employed in those respective occupations, and are not
considerable enough to turn towards any one of them a greater
share of the capital of the country than what would go to it of
its own accord. Their tendency is not to overturn the natural
balance of employments, but to render the work which is done in
each as perfect and complete as possible. The expense of
premiums, besides, is very trifling, that of bounties very great.
The bounty upon corn alone has sometimes cost the public, in one
year, more than 300,000.

Bounties are sometimes called premiums, as drawbacks are
sometimes called bounties. But we must, in all cases, attend to
the nature of the thing, without paying any regard to the word.


Digression concerning the Corn Trade and Corn Laws.


I cannot conclude this chapter concerning bounties, without
observing, that the praises which have been bestowed upon the law
which establishes the bounty upon the exportation of corn, and
upon that system of regulations which is connected with it, are
altogether unmerited. A particular examination of the nature of
the corn trade, and of the principal British laws which relate to
it, will sufficiently demonstrate the truth of this assertion.
The great importance of this subject must justify the length of
the digression.

The trade of the corn merchant is composed of four different
branches, which, though they may sometimes be all carried on by
the same person, are, in their own nature, four separate and
distinct trades. These are, first, the trade of the inland
dealer; secondly, that of the merchant-importer for home
consumption ; thirdly, that of the merchant-exporter of home
produce for foreign consumption ; and, fourthly, that of the
merchant-carrier, or of the importer of corn, in order to export
it again.