

I. The interest of the inland dealer, and that of the great body
of the people, how opposite soever they may at first appear, are,
even in years of the greatest scarcity, exactly the same. It is
his interest to raise the price of his corn as high as the real
scarcity of the season requires, and it can never be his interest
to raise it higher. By raising the price, he discourages the
consumption, and puts every body more or less, but particularly
the inferior ranks of people, upon thrift and good management If,
by raising it too high, he discourages the consumption so much
that the supply of the season is likely to go beyond the
consumption of the season, and to last for some time after the
next crop begins to come in, he runs the hazard, not only of
losing a considerable part of his corn by natural causes, but of
being obliged to sell what remains of it for much less than what
he might have had for it several months before. If, by not
raising the price high enough, he discourages the consumption so
little, that the supply of the season is likely to fall short of
the consumption of the season, he not only loses a part of the
profit which he might otherwise have made, but he exposes the
people to suffer before the end of the season, instead of the
hardships of a dearth, the dreadful horrors of a famine. It is
the interest of the people that their daily, weekly, and monthly
consumption should be proportioned as exactly as possible to the
supply of the season. The interest of the inland corn dealer is
the same. By supplying them, as nearly as he can judge, in this
proportion, he is likely to sell all his corn for the highest
price, and with the greatest profit ; and his knowledge of the
state of the crop, and of his daily, weekly, and monthly sales,
enables him to judge, with more or less accuracy, how far they
really are supplied in this manner. Without intending the
interest of the people, he is necessarily led, by a regard to his
own interest, to treat them, even in years of scarcity, pretty
much in the same manner as the prudent master of a vessel is
sometimes obliged to treat his crew. When he foresees that
provisions are likaly to run short, he puts them upon short
allowance. Though from excess of caution he should sometimes do
this without any real necessity, yet all the inconveniencies
which his crew can thereby suffer are inconsiderable, in
comparison of the danger, misery, and ruin, to which they might
sometimes be exposed by a less provident conduct. Though, from
excess of avarice, in the same manner, the inland corn merchant
should sometimes raise the price of his corn somewhat higher than
the scarcity of the season requires, yet all the inconveniencies
which the people can suffer from this conduct, which effectually
secures them from a famine in the end of the season, are
inconsiderable, in comparison of what they might have been
exposed to by a more liberal way of dealing in the beginning of
it the corn merchant himself is likely to suffer the most by this
excess of avarice; not only from the indignation which it
generally excites against him, but, though he should escape the
effects of this indignation, from the quantity of corn which it
necessarily leaves upon his hands in the end of the season, and
which, if the next season happens to prove favourable, he must
always sell for a much lower price than he might otherwise have
had.

Were it possible, indeed, for one great company of merchants to
possess themselves of the whole crop of an extensive country, it
might perhaps be their interest to deal with it, as the Dutch are
said to do with the spiceries of the Moluccas, to destroy or
throw away a considerable part of it, in order to keep up the
price of the rest. But it is scarce possible, even by the
violence of law, to establish such an extensive monopoly with
regard to corn ; and wherever the law leaves the trade free, it
is of all commodities the least liable to be engrossed or
monopolized by the forced a few large capitals, which buy up the
greater part of it. Not only its value far exceeds what the
capitals of a few private men are capable of purchasing; but,
supposing they were capable of purchasing it, the manner in which
it is produced renders this purchase altogether impracticable.
As, in every civilized country, it is the commodity of which the
annual consumption is the greatest ; so a greater quantity of
industry is annually employed in pruducing corn than in producing
any other commodity. When it first comes from the ground, too, it
is necessarily divided among a greater number of owners than any
other commodity ; and these owners can never be collected into
one place, like a number of independent manufacturers, but are
necessarily scattered through all the different corners of the
country. These first owners either immediately supply the
consumers in their own neighbourhood, or they supply other inland
dealers, who supply those consumers. The inland dealers in corn,
therefore, including both the farmer and the baker, are
necessarily more numerous than the dealers in any other commodity
; and their dispersed situation renders it altogether impossible
for them to enter into any general combination. If, in a year of
scarcity, therefore, any of them should find that he had a good
deal more corn upon hand than, at the current price, he could
hope to dispose of before the end of the season, he would never
think of keeping up this price to his own loss, and to the sole
benefit of his rivals and competitors, but would immediately
lower it, in order to get rid of his corn before the new crop
began to come in. The same motives, the same interests, which
would thus regulate the conduct of any one dealer, would regulate
that of every other, and oblige them all in general to sell their
corn at the price which, according to the best of their judgment,
was most suitable to the scarcity or plenty of the season.

Whoever examines, with attention, the history of the dearths and
famines which have afflicted any part of Europe during either the
course of the present or that of the two preceding centuries, of
several of which we have pretty exact accounts, will find, I
believe, that a dearth never has arisen from any combination
among the inland dealers in corn, nor from any other cause but a
real scarcity, occasioned sometimes, perhaps, and in some
particular places, by the waste of war, but in by far the
greatest number of cases by the fault of the seasons; and that a
famine has never arisen from any other cause but the violence of
government attempting, by improper means, to remedy the
inconveniencies of a dearth.

In an extensive corn country, between all the different parts of
which there is a free commerce and communication, the scarcity
occasioned by the most unfavourable seasons can never be so great
as to produce a famine ; and the scantiest crop, if managed with
frugality and economy, will maintain, through the year, the same
number of people that are commonly fed in a more affluent manner
by one of moderate plenty. The seasons most unfavourable to the
crop are those of excessive drought or excessive rain. But as
corn grows equally upon high and low lands, upon grounds that are
disposed to be too wet, and upon those that are disposed to be
too dry, either the drought or the rain, which is hurtful to one
part of the country, is favourable to another ; and though, both
in the wet and in the dry season, the crop is a good deal less
than in one more properly tempered ; yet, in both, what is lost
in one part of the country is in some measure compensated by what
is gained in the other. In rice countries, where the crop not
only requires a very moist soil, but where, in a certain period
of its growing, it must be laid under water, the effects of a
drought are much more dismal. Even in such countries, however,
the drought is, perhaps, scarce ever so universal as necessarily
to occasion a famine, if the government would allow a free trade.
The drought in Bengal, a few years ago, might probably have
occasioned a very great dearth. Some improper regulations, some
injudicious restraints, imposed by the servants of the East India
Company upon the rice trade, contributed, perhaps, to turn that
dearth into a famine.

When the government, in order to remedy the inconveniencies of a
dearth, orders all the dealers to sell their corn at what it
supposes a reasonable price, it either hinders them from bringing
it to market, which may sometimes produce a famine even in the
beginning of the season ; or, if they bring it thither, it
enables the people, and thereby encourages them to consume it so
fast as must necessarily produce a famine before the end of the
season. The unlimited, unrestrained freedom of the corn trade, as
it is the only effectual preventive of the miseries of a famine,
so it is the best palliative of the inconveniencies of a dearth;
for the inconveniencies of a real scarcity cannot be remedied ;
they can only be palliated. No trade deserves more the full
protection of the law, and no trade requires it so much ; because
no trade is so much exposed to popular odium.

In years of scarcity, the inferior ranks of people impute their
distress to the avarice of the corn merchant, who becomes the
object of their hatred and indignation. Instead of making profit
upon such occasions, therefore, he is often in danger of being
utterly ruined, and of having his magazines plundered and
destroyed by their violence. It is in years of scarcity, however,
when prices are high, that the corn merchant expects to make his
principal profit. He is generally in contract with some farmers
to furnish him, for a certain number of years, with a certain
quantity of corn, at a certain price. This contract price is
settled according to what is supposed to be the moderate and
reasonable, that is, the ordinary or average price, which, before
the late years of scarcity, was commonly about 28s. for the
quarter of wheat, and for that of other grain in proportion. In
years of scarcity, therefore, the corn merchant buys a great part
of his corn for the ordinary price, and sells it for a much
higher. That this extraordinary profit, however, is no more than
sufficient to put his trade upon a fair level with other trades,
and to compensate the many losses which he sustains upon other
occasions, both from the perishable nature of the commodity
itself, and from the frequent and unforeseen fluctuations of its
price, seems evident enough, from this single circumstance, that
great fortunes are as seldom made in this as in any other trade.
The popular odium, however, which attends it in years of
scarcity, the only years in which it can be very profitable,
renders people of character and fortune averse to enter into it.
It is abandoned to an inferior set of dealers; and millers,
bakers, meal-men, and meal-factors, together with a number of
wretched hucksters, are almost the only middle people that, in
the home market, come between the grower and the consumer.

The ancient policy of Europe, instead of discountenancing this
popular odium against a trade so beneficial to the public, seems,
on the contrary, to have authorised and encouraged it.

By the 5th and 6th of Edward VI cap. 14, it was enacted, that
whoever should buy any corn or grain, with intent to sell it
again, should be reputed an unlawful engrosser, and should, for
the first fault, suffer two months imprisonment, and forfeit the
value of the corn ; for the second, suffer six months
imprisonment, and forfeit double the value; and, for the third,
be set in the pillory, suffer imprisonment during the king's
pleasure, and forfeit all his goods and chattels. The ancient
policy of most other parts of Europe was no better than that of
England.

Our ancestors seem to have imagined, that the people would buy
their corn cheaper of the farmer than of the corn merchant, who,
they were afraid, would require, over and above the price which
he paid to the farmer, an exorbitant profit to himself. They
endeavoured, therefore, to annihilate his trade altogether. They
even endeavoured to hinder, as much as possible, any middle man
of any kind from coming in between the grower and the consumer;
and this was the meaning of the many restraints which they
imposed upon the trade of those whom they called kidders, or
carriers of corn ; a trade which nobody was allowed to exercise
without a licence, ascertaining his qualifications as a man of
probity and fair dealing. The authority of three justices of the
peace was, by the statute of Edward VI. necessary in order to
grant this licence. But even this restraint was afterwards
thought insufficient, and, by a statute of Elizabeth, the
privilege of granting it was confined to the quarter-sessions.

The ancient policy of Europe endeavoured, in this manner, to
regulate agriculture, the great trade of the country, by maxims
quite different from those which it established with regard to
manufactures, the great trade of the towns. By leaving a farmer
no other customers but either the consumers or their immediate
factors, the kidders and carriers of corn, it endeavoured to
force him to exercise the trade, not only of a farmer, but of a
corn merchant, or corn retailer. On the contrary, it, in many
cases, prohibited the manufacturer from exercising the trade of a
shopkeeper, or from selling his own goods by retail. It meant, by
the one law, to promote the general interest of the country, or
to render corn cheap, without, perhaps, its being well understood
how this was to be done. By the other, it meant to promote that
of a particular order of men, the shopkeepers, who would be so
much undersold by the manufacturer, it was supposed, that their
trade would be ruined, if he was allowed to retail at all.

The manufacturer, however, though he had been allowed to keep a
shop, and to sell his own goods by retail, could not have
undersold the common shopkeeper. Whatever part of his capital he
might have placed in his shop, he must have withdrawn it from his
manufacture. In order to carry on his business on a level with
that of other people, as he must have had the profit of a
manufacturer on the one part, so he must have had that of a
shopkeper upon the other. Let us suppose, for example, that in
the particular town where he lived, ten per cent. was the
ordinary profit both of manufacturing and shopkeeping stock ; he
must in this case have charged upon every piece of his own goods,
which he sold in his shop, a profit of twenty per cent. When he
carried them from his workhouse to his shop, he must have valued
them at the price for which he could have sold them to a dealer
or shopkeeper, who would have bought them by wholesale. If he
valued them lower, he lost a part of the profit of his
manufacturing capital. When, again, he sold them from his shop,
unless he got the same price at which a shopkeeper would have
sold them, he lost a part of the profit of his shop- keeping
capital. Though he might appear, therefore, to make a double
profit upon the same piece of goods, yet, as these goods made
successively a part of two distinct capitals, he made but a
single profit upon the whole capital employed about them ; and if
he made less than his profit, he was a loser, and did not employ
his whole capital with the same advantage as the greater part of
his neighbours.

What the manufacturer was prohibited to do, the farmer was in
some measure enjoined to do ; to divide his capital between two
different employments; to keep one part of it in his granaries
and stack-yard, for supplying the occasional demands of the
market, and to employ the other in the cultivation of his land.
But as he could not afford to employ the latter for less than the
ordinary profits of farming stock, so he could as little afford
to employ the former for less than the ordinary profits of
mercantile stock. Whether the stock which really carried on the
business of a corn merchant belonged to the person who was called
a farmer, or to the person who was called a corn merchant, an
equal profit was in both cases requisite, in order to indemnify
its owner for employing it in this manner, in order to put his
business on a level with other trades, and in order to hinder him
from having an interest to change it as soon as possible for some
other. The farmer, therefore, who was thus forced to exercise the
trade of a corn merchant, could not afford to sell his corn
cheaper than any other corn merchant would have been obliged to
do in the case of a free competition.

The dealer who can employ his whole stock in one single branch of
business, has an advantage of the same kind with the workman who
can employ his whole labour in one single operation. As the
latter acquires a dexterity which enables him, with the same two
hands, to perform a much greater quantity of work, so the former
acquires so easy and ready a method of transacting his business,
of buying and disposing of his goods, that with the same capital
he can transact a much greater quantity of business. As the one
can commonly afford his work a good deal cheaper, so the other
can commonly afford his goods somewhat cheaper, than if his stock
and attention were both employed about a greater variety of
objects. The greater part of manufacturers could not afford to
retail their own goods so cheap as a vigilant and active
shopkeeper, whose sole business it was to buy them by wholesale
and to retail them again. The greater part of farmers could still
less afford to retail their own corn, to supply the inhabitants
of a town, at perhaps four or five miles distance from the
greater part of them, so cheap as a vigilant and active corn
merchant, whose sole business it was to purchase corn by
wholesale, to collect it into a great magazine, and to retail it
again.

The law which prohibited the manufacturer from exercising the
trade of a shopkeeper, endeavoured to force this division in the
employment of stock to go on faster than it might otherwise have
done. The law which obliged the farmer to exercise the trade of a
corn merchant, endeavoured to hinder it from going on so fast.
Both laws were evident violations of natural liberty, and
therefore unjust; and they were both, too, as impolitic as they
were unjust. It is the interest of every society, that things of
this kind should never either he forced or obstructed. The man
who employs either his labour or his stock in a greater variety
of ways than his situation renders necessary, can never hurt his
neighbour by underselling him. He may hurt himself, and he
generally does so. Jack-of-all-trades will never be rich, says
the proverb. But the law ought always to trust people with the
care of their own interest, as in their local situations they
must generally he able to judge better of it than the legislature
can do. The law, however, which obliged the farmer to exercise
the trade of a corn merchant was by far the most pernicious of
the two.

It obstructed not only that division in the employment of stock
which is so advantageous to every society, but it obstructed
likewise the improvement and cultivation of the land. By obliging
the farmer to carry on two trades instead of one, it forced him
to divide his capital into two parts, of which one only could be
employed in cultivation. But if he had been at liberty to sell
his whole crop to a corn mercliant as fast as he could thresh it
out, his whole capital might have returned immediately to the
land, and have been employed in buying more cattle, and hiring
more servants, in order to improve and cultivate it better. But
by being obliged to sell his corn by retail, he was obliged to
keep a great part of his capital in his granaries and stack-yard
through the year, and could not therefore cultivate so well as
with the same capital he might otherwise have done. This law,
therefore, necessarily obstructed the improvement of the land,
and, instead of tending to render corn cheaper, must have tended
to render it scarcer, and therefore dearer, than it would
otherwise have been.

After the business of the farmer, that of the corn merchant is in
reality the trade which, if properly protected and encouraged,
would contribute the most to the raising of corn. It would
support the trade of the farmer, in the same manner as the trade
of the wholesale dealer supports that of the manufacturer.

The wholesale dealer, by affording a ready market to the
manufacturer, by taking his goods off his hand as fast as he can
make them, and by sometimes even advancing their price to him
before he has made them, enables him to keep his whole capital,
and sometimes even more than his whole capital, constantly
employed in manufacturing, and consequently to manufacture a much
greater quantity of goods than if he was obliged to dispose of
them himself to the immediate consumers, or even to the
retailers.     As the capital of the wholesale merchant, too, is
generally sufficient to replace that of many manufacturers, this
intercourse between him and them interests the owner of a large
capital to support the owners of a great number of small ones,
and to assist them in those losses and misfortunes which might
otherwise prove ruinous to them.

An intercourse of the same kind universally established between
the farmers and the corn merchants, would be attended with
effects equally beneficial to the farmers. They would be enabled
to keep their whole capitals, and even more than their whole
capitals constantly employed in cultivation. In case of any of
those accidents to which no trade is more liable than theirs,
they would find in their ordinary customer, the wealthy corn
merchant, a person who had both an interest to support them, and
the ability to do it ; and they would not, as at present, be
entirely dependent upon the forbearance of their landlord, or the
mercy of his steward. Were it possible, as perhaps it is not, to
establish this intercourse universally, and all at once ; were it
possible to turn all at once the whole farming stock of the
kingdom to its proper business, the cultivation of land,
withdrawing it from every other employment into which any part of
it may be at present diverted; and were it possible, in order to
support and assist, upon occasion, the operations of this great
stock, to provide all at once another stock almost equally great;
it is not, perhaps, very easy to imagine how great, how
extensive, and how sudden, would be the improvement which this
change of circumstances would alone produce upon the whole face
of the country.

The statute of Edward VI. therefore, by prohibiting as much as
possible any middle man from coming in between the grower and the
consumer, endeavoured to annihilate a trade, of which the free
exercise is not only the best palliative of the inconveniencics
of a dearth, but the best preventive of that calamity ; after the
trade of the farmer, no trade contributing so much to the growing
of corn as that of the corn merchant.

The rigour of this law was afterwards softened by several
subsequent statutes, which successvely permitted the engrossing
of corn when the price of wheat should not exceed 20s. and 24s.
32s. and 40s. the quarter. At last, by the 15th of Charles II.
c.7, the engrossing or buying of corn, in order to sell it again,
as long as the price of wheat did not exceed 48s. the quarter,
and that of other grain in proportion, was declared lawful to all
persons not being forestallers, that is, not selling again in the
same market within three months. All the freedom which the trade
of the inland corn dealer has ever yet enjoyed was bestowed upon
it by this statute. The statute of the twelfth of the present
king, which repeals almost all the other ancient laws against
engrossers and forestallers, does not repeal the restrictions of
this particular statute, which therefore still continue in force.

This statute, however, authorises in some measure two very absurd
popular prejudices.

First,    It supposes, that when the price of wheat has risen so
high as 48s. the quarter, and that of other grain in proportion,
corn is likely to be so engrossed as to hurt the people. But,
from what has been already said, it seems evident enough, that
corn can at no price be so engrossed by the inland dealers as to
hurt the people; and 48s. the quarter, besides, though it may be
considered as a very high price, yet, in years of scarcity, it is
a price which frequently takes place immediately after harvest,
when scarce any part of the new crop can be sold off, and when it
is impossible even for ignorance to suppose that any part of it
can be so engrossed as to hurt the people.

Secondly,    It supposes that there is a certain price at which
corn is likely to be forestalled, that is, bought up in order to
be sold again soon after in the same market, so as to hurt the
people. But if a merchant ever buys up corn, either going to a
particular market, or in a particular market, in order to sell it
again soon after in the same market, it must be because he judges
that the market cannot be so liberally supplied through the whole
season as upon that particular occasion, and that the price,
therefore, must soon rise. If he judges wrong in this, and if the
price does not rise, he not only loses the whole profit of the
stock which he employs in this manner, but a part of the stock
itself, by the expense and loss which necessarily attend the
storing and keeping of corn. He hurts himself, therefore, much
more essentially than he can hurt even the particular people whom
he may hinder from supplying themselves upon that particular
market day, because they may afterwards supply themselves just as
cheap upon any other market day. If he judges right, instead of
hurting the great body of the people, he renders them a most
important service. By making them feel the inconveniencies of a
dearth somewhat earlier than they otherwise might do, he prevents
their feeling them afterwads so severely as they certainly would
do, if the cheapness of price encouraged them to consume faster
than suited the real scarcity of the season. When the scarcity is
real, the best thing that can be done for the people is, to
divide the inconvenience of it as equally as possible, through
all the different months and weeks and days of the year. The
interest of the corn merchant makes him study to do this as
exactly as he can; and as no other person can have either the
same interest, or the same knowledge, or the same abilities, to
do it so exactly as he, this most important operation of commerce
ought to be trusted entirely to him; or, in other words, the corn
trade, so far at least as concerns the supply of the home market,
ought to be left perfectly free.

The popular fear of engrossing and forestalling may be compared
to the popular terrors and suspicions of witchcraft. The
unfortunate wretches accused of this latter crime were not more
innocent of the misfortunes imputed to them, than those who have
been accused of the former. The law which put an end to all
prosecutions against witchcraft, which put it out of any man's
power to gratify his own malice by accusing his neighbour of that
imaginary crime, seems effectually to have put an end to those
fears and suspicions, by taking away the great cause which
encouraged and supported them. The law which would restore entire
freedom to the inland trade of corn, would probably prove as
effectual to put an end to the popular fears of engrossing and
forestalling.

The 15th of Charles II. c. 7, however, with all its
imperfections, has, perhaps, contributed more, both to the
plentiful supply of the home market, and to the increase of
tillage, than any other law in the statute book. It is from this
law that the inland corn trade has derived all the liberty and
protection which it has ever yet enjoyed ; and both the supply of
the home market and the interest of tillage are much more
effectually promoted by the inland, than either by the
importation or exportation trade.

The proportion of the average quantity of all sorts of grain
imported into Great Britain to that of all sorts of grain
consumed, it has been computed by the author of the Tracts upon
the Corn Trade, does not exceed that of one to five hundred and
seventy. For supplying the home market, therefore, the importance
of the inland trade must be to that of the importation trade as
five hundred and seventy to one.

The average quantity of all sorts of grain exported from Great
Britain does not, according to the same author, exceed the
one-and-thirtieth part of the annual produce. For the
encouragement of tillage, therefore, by providing a market for
the home produce, the importance of the inland trade must be to
that of the exportation trade as thirty to one.

I have no great faith in political arithmetic, and I mean not to
warrant the exactness of either of these computations. I mention
them only in order to show of how much less consequence, in the
opinion of the most judicious and experienced persons, the
foreign trade of corn is than the home trade. The great cheapness
of corn in the years immediately preceding the establishment of
the bounty may, perhaps with reason, be ascribed in some measure
to the operation of this statute of Charles II. which had been
enacted about five-and-twenty years before, and which had,
therefore, full time to produce its effect.

A very few words will sufficiently explain all that I have to say
concerning the other three branches of the corn trade.