

II. The trade of the merchant-importer of foreign corn for home
consumption, evidently contributes to the immediate supply of the
home market, and must so far be immediately beneficial to the
great body of the people. It tends, indeed, to lower somewhat the
average money price of corn, but not to diminish its real value,
or the quantity of labour which it is capable of maintaining. If
importation was at all times free, our farmers and country
gentlemen would probably, one year with another, get less money
for their corn than they do at present, when importation is at
most times in effect prohibited ; but the money which they got
would be of more value, would buy more goods of all other kinds,
and would employ more labour. Their real wealth, their real
revenue, therefore, would be the same as at present, though it
might be expressed by a smaller quantity of silver, and they
would neither be disabled nor discouraged from cultivating corn
as much as they do at present. On the contrary, as the rise in
the real value of silver, in consequence of lowering the money
price of corn, lowers somewhat the money price of all other
commodities, it gives the industry of the country where it takes
place some advantage in all foreign markets and thereby tends to
encourage and increase that industry. But the extent of the home
market for corn must be in proportion to the general industry of
the country where it grows, or to the number of those who produce
something else, and therefore, have something else, or, what
comes to the same thing, the price of something else, to give in
exchange for corn. But in every country, the home market, as it
is the nearest and most convenient, so is it likewise the
greatest and most important market for corn. That rise in the
real value of silver, therefore, which is the effect of lowering
the average money price of corn, tends to enlarge the greatest
and most important market for corn, and thereby to encourage,
instead of discouraging its growth.

By the 22d of Charles II. c. 13, the importation of wheat,
whenever the price in the home market did not exceed 53s:4d. the
quarter, was subjected to a duty of 16s. the quarter; and to a
duty of 8s. whenever the price did not exceed 4. The former of
these two prices has, for more than a century past, taken place
only in times of very great scarcity ; and the latter has, so far
as I know, not taken place at all. Yet, till wheat has risen
above this latter price, it was, by this statute, subjected to a
very high duty; and, till it had risen above the former, to a
duty which amounted to a prohibition. The importation of other
sorts of grain was restrained at rates and by duties, in
proportion to the value of the grain, almost equally high. Before
the 13th of the present king, the following were the duties
payable upon the importation of the different sorts of grain :

    Grain.                     Duties.          Duties       Duties.
Beans to 28s. per qr.  19s:10d. after till 40s. 16s:8d. then 12d.
Barley to 28s.   -     19s:10d.         -  32s. 16s.     -   12d.
Malt is prohibited by the annual malt-tax bill.
Oats   to 16s.   -      5s:10d after    -                    9d.
Pease   to 40s.  -     16s: 0d.after    -                    9d.
Rye     to 36s.  -     19s:10d. till 40s.       16s:8d   -   12d.
Wheat to 44s.    -     21s: 9d. till 53s:4d.    17s.     -    8s.
                         till 4, and after that about       1s:4d.
Buck-wheat to 32s. per qr.     to pay 16s.

These different duties were imposed, partly by the 22d of Charles
II. in place of the old subsidy, partly by the new subsidy, by
the one-third and two-thirds subsidy, and by the subsidy 1747.
Subsequent laws still further increased those duties.

The distress which, in years of scarcity, the strict execution of
those laws might have brought upon the people, would probably
have been very great ; but, upon such occasions, its execution
was generally suspended by temporary statutes, which permitted,
for a limited time, the importation of foreign corn. The
necessity of these temporary statutes sufficiently demonstrates
the impropriety of this general one.

These restraints upon importation, though prior to the
establishment of the bounty, were dictated by the same spirit, by
the same principles, which afterwards enacted that regulation.
How hurtful soever in themselves, these, or some other restraints
upon importation, became necessary in consequence of that
regulation. If, when wheat was either below 48s. the quarter, or
not much above it, foreign corn could have been imported, either
duty free, or upon paying only a small duty, it might have been
exported again, with the benefit of the bounty, to the great loss
of the public revenue, and to the entire perversion of the
institution, of which the object was to extend the market for the
home growth, not that for the growth of foreign countries.