
CHAPTER IX



Remarks upon Von Hartmann's position in regard to instinct.

Uncertain how far the foregoing chapter is not better left without
comment of any kind, I nevertheless think that some of my readers may
be helped by the following extracts from the notes I took while
translating.  I will give them as they come, without throwing them
into connected form.


Von Hartmann defines instinct as action done with a purpose, but
without consciousness of purpose.

The building of her nest by a bird is an instinctive action; it is
done with a purpose, but it is arbitrary to say that the bird has no
knowledge of that purpose.  Some hold that birds when they are
building their nest know as well that they mean to bring up a family
in it as a young married couple do when they build themselves a
house.  This is the conclusion which would be come to by a plain
person on a prima facie view of the facts, and Von Hartmann shows no
reason for modifying it.

A better definition of instinct would be that it is inherited
knowledge in respect of certain facts, and of the most suitable
manner in which to deal with them.


Von Hartmann speaks of "a mechanism of brain or mind" contrived by
nature, and again of "a psychical organisation," as though it were
something distinct from a physical organisation.

We can conceive of such a thing as mechanism of brain, for we have
seen brain and handled it; but until we have seen a mind and handled
it, or at any rate been enabled to draw inferences which will warrant
us in conceiving of it as a material substance apart from bodily
substance, we cannot infer that it has an organisation apart from
bodily organisation.  Does Von Hartmann mean that we have two bodies-
-a body-body, and a soul-body?


He says that no one will call the action of the spider instinctive in
voiding the fluids from its glands when they are too full.  Why not?


He is continually personifying instinct; thus he speaks of the "ends
proposed to itself by the instinct," of "the blind unconscious
purpose of the instinct," of "an unconscious purpose constraining the
volition of the bird," of "each variation and modification of the
instinct," as though instinct, purpose, and, later on, clairvoyance,
were persons, and not words characterising a certain class of
actions.  The ends are proposed to itself by the animal, not by the
instinct.  Nothing but mischief can come of a mode of expression
which does not keep this clearly in view.


It must not be supposed that the same cuckoo is in the habit of
laying in the nests of several different species, and of changing the
colour of her eggs according to that of the eggs of the bird in whose
nest she lays.  I have inquired from Mr. R. Bowdler Sharpe of the
ornithological department at the British Museum, who kindly gives it
me as his opinion that though cuckoos do imitate the eggs of the
species on whom they foist their young ones, yet one cuckoo will
probably lay in the nests of one species also, and will stick to that
species for life.  If so, the same race of cuckoos may impose upon
the same species for generations together.  The instinct will even
thus remain a very wonderful one, but it is not at all inconsistent
with the theory put forward by Professor Hering and myself.


Returning to the idea of psychical mechanism, he admits that "it is
itself so obscure that we can hardly form any idea concerning it,"
{139a} and then goes on to claim for it that it explains a great many
other things.  This must have been the passage which Mr. Sully had in
view when he very justly wrote that Von Hartmann "dogmatically closes
the field of physical inquiry, and takes refuge in a phantom which
explains everything, simply because it is itself incapable of
explanation."


According to Von Hartmann {139b} the unpractised animal manifests its
instinct as perfectly as the practised.  This is not the case.  The
young animal exhibits marvellous proficiency, but it gains by
experience.  I have watched sparrows, which I can hardly doubt to be
young ones, spend a whole month in trying to build their nest, and
give it up in the end as hopeless.  I have watched three such cases
this spring in a tree not twenty feet from my own window and on a
level with my eye, so that I have been able to see what was going on
at all hours of the day.  In each case the nest was made well and
rapidly up to a certain point, and then got top-heavy and tumbled
over, so that little was left on the tree:  it was reconstructed and
reconstructed over and over again, always with the same result, till
at last in all three cases the birds gave up in despair.  I believe
the older and stronger birds secure the fixed and best sites, driving
the younger birds to the trees, and that the art of building nests in
trees is dying out among house-sparrows.


He declares that instinct is not due to organisation so much as
organisation to instinct. {140}  The fact is, that neither can claim
precedence of or pre-eminence over the other.  Instinct and
organisation are only mind and body, or mind and matter; and these
are not two separable things, but one and inseparable, with, as it
were, two sides; the one of which is a function of the other.  There
was never yet either matter without mind, however low, nor mind,
however high, without a material body of some sort; there can be no
change in one without a corresponding change in the other; neither
came before the other; neither can either cease to change or cease to
be; for "to be" is to continue changing, so that "to be" and "to
change" are one.


Whence, he asks, comes the desire to gratify an instinct before
experience of the pleasure that will ensue on gratification?  This is
a pertinent question, but it is met by Professor Hering with the
answer that this is due to memory--to the continuation in the germ of
vibrations that were vibrating in the body of the parent, and which,
when stimulated by vibrations of a suitable rhythm, become more and
more powerful till they suffice to set the body in visible action.
For my own part I only venture to maintain that it is due to memory,
that is to say, to an enduring sense on the part of the germ of the
action it took when in the persons of its ancestors, and of the
gratification which ensued thereon.  This meets Von Hartmann's whole
difficulty.


The glacier is not snow.  It is snow packed tight into a small
compass, and has thus lost all trace of its original form.  How
incomplete, however, would be any theory of glacial action which left
out of sight the origin of the glacier in snow!  Von Hartmann loses
sight of the origin of instinctive in deliberative actions because
the two classes of action are now in many respects different.  His
philosophy of the unconscious fails to consider what is the normal
process by means of which such common actions as we can watch, and
whose history we can follow, have come to be done unconsciously.


He says, {141} "How inconceivable is the supposition of a mechanism,
&c., &c.; how clear and simple, on the other hand, is the view that
there is an unconscious purpose constraining the volition of the bird
to the use of the fitting means."  Does he mean that there is an
actual thing--an unconscious purpose--something outside the bird, as
it were a man, which lays hold of the bird and makes it do this or
that, as a master makes a servant do his bidding?  If so, he again
personifies the purpose itself, and must therefore embody it, or be
talking in a manner which plain people cannot understand.  If, on the
other hand, he means "how simple is the view that the bird acts
unconsciously," this is not more simple than supposing it to act
consciously; and what ground has he for supposing that the bird is
unconscious?  It is as simple, and as much in accordance with the
facts, to suppose that the bird feels the air to be colder, and knows
that she must warm her eggs if she is to hatch them, as consciously
as a mother knows that she must not expose her new-born infant to the
cold.


On page 99 of this book we find Von Hartmann saying that if it is
once granted that the normal and abnormal manifestations of instinct
spring from a single source, then the objection that the modification
is due to conscious knowledge will be found to be a suicidal one
later on, in so far as it is directed against instinct generally.  I
understand him to mean that if we admit instinctive action, and the
modifications of that action which more nearly resemble results of
reason, to be actions of the same ultimate kind differing in degree
only, and if we thus attempt to reduce instinctive action to the
prophetic strain arising from old experience, we shall be obliged to
admit that the formation of the embryo is ultimately due to
reflection--which he seems to think is a reductio ad absurdum of the
argument.

Therefore, he concludes, if there is to be only one source, the
source must be unconscious, and not conscious.  We reply, that we do
not see the absurdity of the position which we grant we have been
driven to.  We hold that the formation of the embryo IS ultimately
due to reflection and design.


The writer of an article in the Times, April 1, 1880, says that
servants must be taught their calling before they can practise it;
but, in fact, they can only be taught their calling by practising it.
So Von Hartmann says animals must feel the pleasure consequent on
gratification of an instinct before they can be stimulated to act
upon the instinct by a knowledge of the pleasure that will ensue.
This sounds logical, but in practice a little performance and a
little teaching--a little sense of pleasure and a little connection
of that pleasure with this or that practice,--come up simultaneously
from something that we cannot see, the two being so small and so much
abreast, that we do not know which is first, performance or teaching;
and, again, action, or pleasure supposed as coming from the action.


"Geistes-mechanismus" comes as near to "disposition of mind," or,
more shortly, "disposition," as so unsatisfactory a word can come to
anything.  Yet, if we translate it throughout by "disposition," we
shall see how little we are being told.

We find on page 114 that "all instinctive actions give us an
impression of absolute security and infallibility"; that "the will is
never weak or hesitating, as it is when inferences are being drawn
consciously."  "We never," Von Hartmann continues, "find instinct
making mistakes."  Passing over the fact that instinct is again
personified, the statement is still incorrect.  Instinctive actions
are certainly, as a general rule, performed with less uncertainty
than deliberative ones; this is explicable by the fact that they have
been more often practised, and thus reduced more completely to a
matter of routine; but nothing is more certain than that animals
acting under the guidance of inherited experience or instinct
frequently make mistakes which with further practice they correct.
Von Hartmann has abundantly admitted that the manner of an
instinctive action is often varied in correspondence with variation
in external circumstances.  It is impossible to see how this does not
involve both possibility of error and the connection of instinct with
deliberation at one and the same time.  The fact is simply this--when
an animal finds itself in a like position with that in which it has
already often done a certain thing in the persons of its forefathers,
it will do this thing well and easily:  when it finds the position
somewhat, but not unrecognisably, altered through change either in
its own person or in the circumstances exterior to it, it will vary
its action with greater or less ease according to the nature of the
change in the position:  when the position is gravely altered the
animal either bungles or is completely thwarted.


Not only does Von Hartmann suppose that instinct may, and does,
involve knowledge antecedent to, and independent of, experience--an
idea as contrary to the tendency of modern thought as that of
spontaneous generation, with which indeed it is identical though
presented in another shape--but he implies by his frequent use of the
word "unmittelbar" that a result can come about without any cause
whatever.  So he says, "Um fur die unbewusster Erkenntniss, welche
nicht durch sinnliche Wahrnehmung erworben, sondern als unmittelbar
Besitz," &c. {144a}  Because he does not see where the experience can
have been gained, he cuts the knot, and denies that there has been
experience.  We say, Look more attentively and you will discover the
time and manner in which the experience was gained.


Again, he continually assumes that animals low down in the scale of
life cannot know their own business because they show no sign of
knowing ours.  See his remarks on Saturnia pavonia minor (page 107),
and elsewhere on cattle and gadflies.  The question is not what can
they know, but what does their action prove to us that they do know.
With each species of animal or plant there is one profession only,
and it is hereditary.  With us there are many professions, and they
are not hereditary; so that they cannot become instinctive, as they
would otherwise tend to do.


He attempts {144b} to draw a distinction between the causes that have
produced the weapons and working instruments of animals, on the one
hand, and those that lead to the formation of hexagonal cells by
bees, &c., on the other.  No such distinction can be justly drawn.


The ghost-stories which Von Hartmann accepts will hardly be accepted
by people of sound judgment.  There is one well-marked distinctive
feature between the knowledge manifested by animals when acting
instinctively and the supposed knowledge of seers and clairvoyants.
In the first case, the animal never exhibits knowledge except upon
matters concerning which its race has been conversant for
generations; in the second, the seer is supposed to do so.  In the
first case, a new feature is invariably attended with disturbance of
the performance and the awakening of consciousness and deliberation,
unless the new matter is too small in proportion to the remaining
features of the case to attract attention, or unless, though really
new, it appears so similar to an old feature as to be at first
mistaken for it; with the second, it is not even professed that the
seer's ancestors have had long experience upon the matter concerning
which the seer is supposed to have special insight, and I can imagine
no more powerful a priori argument against a belief in such stories.


Close upon the end of his chapter Von Hartmann touches upon the one
matter which requires consideration.  He refers the similarity of
instinct that is observable among all species to the fact that like
causes produce like effects; and I gather, though he does not
expressly say so, that he considers similarity of instinct in
successive generations to be referable to the same cause as
similarity of instinct between all the contemporary members of a
species.  He thus raises the one objection against referring the
phenomena of heredity to memory which I think need be gone into with
any fulness.  I will, however, reserve this matter for my concluding
chapters.

Von Hartmann concludes his chapter with a quotation from Schelling,
to the effect that the phenomena of animal instinct are the true
touchstone of a durable philosophy; by which I suppose it is intended
to say that if a system or theory deals satisfactorily with animal
instinct, it will stand, but not otherwise.  I can wish nothing
better than that the philosophy of the unconscious advanced by Von
Hartmann be tested by this standard.


