
CHAPTER V



Introduction to Professor Hering's lecture.

After I had finished "Evolution, Old and New," I wrote some articles
for the Examiner, {52} in which I carried out the idea put forward in
"Life and Habit," that we are one person with our ancestors.  It
follows from this, that all living animals and vegetables, being--as
appears likely if the theory of evolution is accepted--descended from
a common ancestor, are in reality one person, and unite to form a
body corporate, of whose existence, however, they are unconscious.
There is an obvious analogy between this and the manner in which the
component cells of our bodies unite to form our single individuality,
of which it is not likely they have a conception, and with which they
have probably only the same partial and imperfect sympathy as we, the
body corporate, have with them.  In the articles above alluded to I
separated the organic from the inorganic, and when I came to rewrite
them, I found that this could not be done, and that I must
reconstruct what I had written.  I was at work on this--to which I
hope to return shortly--when Dr. Krause's' "Erasmus Darwin," with its
preliminary notice by Mr. Charles Darwin, came out, and having been
compelled, as I have shown above, by Dr. Krause's work to look a
little into the German language, the opportunity seemed favourable
for going on with it and becoming acquainted with Professor Hering's
lecture.  I therefore began to translate his lecture at once, with
the kind assistance of friends whose patience seemed inexhaustible,
and found myself well rewarded for my trouble.

Professor Hering and I, to use a metaphor of his own, are as men who
have observed the action of living beings upon the stage of the
world, he from the point of view at once of a spectator and of one
who has free access to much of what goes on behind the scenes, I from
that of a spectator only, with none but the vaguest notion of the
actual manner in which the stage machinery is worked.  If two men so
placed, after years of reflection, arrive independently of one
another at an identical conclusion as regards the manner in which
this machinery must have been invented and perfected, it is natural
that each should take a deep interest in the arguments of the other,
and be anxious to put them forward with the utmost possible
prominence.  It seems to me that the theory which Professor Hering
and I are supporting in common, is one the importance of which is
hardly inferior to that of the theory of evolution itself--for it
puts the backbone, as it were, into the theory of evolution.  I shall
therefore make no apology for laying my translation of Professor
Hering's work before my reader.

Concerning the identity of the main idea put forward in "Life and
Habit" with that of Professor Hering's lecture, there can hardly, I
think, be two opinions.  We both of us maintain that we grow our
limbs as we do, and possess the instincts we possess, because we
remember having grown our limbs in this way, and having had these
instincts in past generations when we were in the persons of our
forefathers--each individual life adding a small (but so small, in
any one lifetime, as to be hardly appreciable) amount of new
experience to the general store of memory; that we have thus got into
certain habits which we can now rarely break; and that we do much of
what we do unconsciously on the same principle as that (whatever it
is) on which we do all other habitual actions, with the greater ease
and unconsciousness the more often we repeat them.  Not only is the
main idea the same, but I was surprised to find how often Professor
Hering and I had taken the same illustrations with which to point our
meaning.

Nevertheless, we have each of us left undealt with some points which
the other has treated of.  Professor Hering, for example, goes into
the question of what memory is, and this I did not venture to do.  I
confined myself to saying that whatever memory was, heredity was
also.  Professor Hering adds that memory is due to vibrations of the
molecules of the nerve fibres, which under certain circumstances
recur, and bring about a corresponding recurrence of visible action.

This approaches closely to the theory concerning the physics of
memory which has been most generally adopted since the time of
Bonnet, who wrote as follows:-


"The soul never has a new sensation but by the inter position of the
senses.  This sensation has been originally attached to the motion of
certain fibres.  Its reproduction or recollection by the senses will
then be likewise connected with these same fibres." . . . {54a}


And again:-


"It appeared to me that since this memory is connected with the body,
it must depend upon some change which must happen to the primitive
state of the sensible fibres by the action of objects.  I have,
therefore, admitted as probable that the state of the fibres on which
an object has acted is not precisely the same after this action as it
was before I have conjectured that the sensible fibres experience
more or less durable modifications, which constitute the physics of
memory and recollection." {54b}


Professor Hering comes near to endorsing this view, and uses it for
the purpose of explaining personal identity.  This, at least, is what
he does in fact, though perhaps hardly in words.  I did not say more
upon the essence of personality than that it was inseparable from the
idea that the various phases of our existence should have flowed one
out of the other, "in what we see as a continuous, though it may be
at times a very troubled, stream" {55} but I maintained that the
identity between two successive generations was of essentially the
same kind as that existing between an infant and an octogenarian.  I
thus left personal identity unexplained, though insisting that it was
the key to two apparently distinct sets of phenomena, the one of
which had been hitherto considered incompatible with our ideas
concerning it.  Professor Hering insists on this too, but he gives us
farther insight into what personal identity is, and explains how it
is that the phenomena of heredity are phenomena also of personal
identity.

He implies, though in the short space at his command he has hardly
said so in express terms, that personal identity as we commonly think
of it--that is to say, as confined to the single life of the
individual--consists in the uninterruptedness of a sufficient number
of vibrations, which have been communicated from molecule to molecule
of the nerve fibres, and which go on communicating each one of them
its own peculiar characteristic elements to the new matter which we
introduce into the body by way of nutrition.  These vibrations may be
so gentle as to be imperceptible for years together; but they are
there, and may become perceived if they receive accession through the
running into them of a wave going the same way as themselves, which
wave has been set up in the ether by exterior objects and has been
communicated to the organs of sense.

As these pages are on the point of leaving my hands, I see the
following remarkable passage in Mind for the current month, and
introduce it parenthetically here:-


"I followed the sluggish current of hyaline material issuing from
globules of most primitive living substance.  Persistently it
followed its way into space, conquering, at first, the manifold
resistances opposed to it by its watery medium.  Gradually, however,
its energies became exhausted, till at last, completely overwhelmed,
it stopped, an immovable projection stagnated to death-like rigidity.
Thus for hours, perhaps, it remained stationary, one of many such
rays of some of the many kinds of protoplasmic stars.  By degrees,
then, or perhaps quite suddenly, HELP WOULD COME TO IT FROM FOREIGN
BUT CONGRUOUS SOURCES.  IT WOULD SEEM TO COMBINE WITH OUTSIDE
COMPLEMENTAL MATTER drifted to it at random.  Slowly it would regain
thereby its vital mobility.  Shrinking at first, but gradually
completely restored and reincorporated into the onward tide of life,
it was ready to take part again in the progressive flow of a new
ray." {56}


To return to the end of the last paragraph but one.  If this is so--
but I should warn the reader that Professor Hering is not responsible
for this suggestion, though it seems to follow so naturally from what
he has said that I imagine he intended the inference to be drawn,--if
this is so, assimilation is nothing else than the communication of
its own rhythms from the assimilating to the assimilated substance,
to the effacement of the vibrations or rhythms heretofore existing in
this last; and suitability for food will depend upon whether the
rhythms of the substance eaten are such as to flow harmoniously into
and chime in with those of the body which has eaten it, or whether
they will refuse to act in concert with the new rhythms with which
they have become associated, and will persist obstinately in pursuing
their own course.  In this case they will either be turned out of the
body at once, or will disconcert its arrangements, with perhaps fatal
consequences.  This comes round to the conclusion I arrived at in
"Life and Habit," that assimilation was nothing but the imbuing of
one thing with the memories of another.  (See "Life and Habit," pp.
136, 137, 140, &c.)

It will be noted that, as I resolved the phenomena of heredity into
phenomena of personal identity, and left the matter there, so
Professor Hering resolves the phenomena of personal identity into the
phenomena of a living mechanism whose equilibrium is disturbed by
vibrations of a certain character--and leaves it there.  We now want
to understand more about the vibrations.

But if, according to Professor Hering, the personal identity of the
single life consists in the uninterruptedness of vibrations, so also
do the phenomena of heredity.  For not only may vibrations of a
certain violence or character be persistent unperceived for many
years in a living body, and communicate themselves to the matter it
has assimilated, but they may, and will, under certain circumstances,
extend to the particle which is about to leave the parent body as the
germ of its future offspring.  In this minute piece of matter there
must, if Professor Hering is right, be an infinity of rhythmic
undulations incessantly vibrating with more or less activity, and
ready to be set in more active agitation at a moment's warning, under
due accession of vibration from exterior objects.  On the occurrence
of such stimulus, that is to say, when a vibration of a suitable
rhythm from without concurs with one within the body so as to augment
it, the agitation may gather such strength that the touch, as it
were, is given to a house of cards, and the whole comes toppling
over.  This toppling over is what we call action; and when it is the
result of the disturbance of certain usual arrangements in certain
usual ways, we call it the habitual development and instinctive
characteristics of the race.  In either case, then, whether we
consider the continued identity of the individual in what we call his
single life, or those features in his offspring which we refer to
heredity, the same explanation of the phenomena is applicable.  It
follows from this as a matter of course, that the continuation of
life or personal identity in the individual and the race are
fundamentally of the same kind, or, in other words, that there is a
veritable prolongation of identity or oneness of personality between
parents and offspring.  Professor Hering reaches his conclusion by
physical methods, while I reached mine, as I am told, by
metaphysical.  I never yet could understand what "metaphysics" and
"metaphysical" mean; but I should have said I reached it by the
exercise of a little common sense while regarding certain facts which
are open to every one.  There is, however, so far as I can see, no
difference in the conclusion come to.

The view which connects memory with vibrations may tend to throw
light upon that difficult question, the manner in which neuter bees
acquire structures and instincts, not one of which was possessed by
any of their direct ancestors.  Those who have read "Life and Habit"
may remember, I suggested that the food prepared in the stomachs of
the nurse-bees, with which the neuter working bees are fed, might
thus acquire a quasi-seminal character, and be made a means of
communicating the instincts and structures in question. {58}  If
assimilation be regarded as the receiving by one substance of the
rhythms or undulations from another, the explanation just referred to
receives an accession of probability.

If it is objected that Professor Hering's theory as to continuity of
vibrations being the key to memory and heredity involves the action
of more wheels within wheels than our imagination can come near to
comprehending, and also that it supposes this complexity of action as
going on within a compass which no unaided eye can detect by reason
of its littleness, so that we are carried into a fairy land with
which sober people should have nothing to do, it may be answered that
the case of light affords us an example of our being truly aware of a
multitude of minute actions, the hundred million millionth part of
which we should have declared to be beyond our ken, could we not
incontestably prove that we notice and count them all with a very
sufficient and creditable accuracy.

"Who would not," {59a} says Sir John Herschel, "ask for demonstration
when told that a gnat's wing, in its ordinary flight, beats many
hundred times in a second? or that there exist animated and regularly
organised beings many thousands of whose bodies laid close together
would not extend to an inch?  But what are these to the astonishing
truths which modern optical inquiries have disclosed, which teach us
that every point of a medium through which a ray of light passes is
affected with a succession of periodical movements, recurring
regularly at equal intervals, no less than five hundred millions of
millions of times in a second; that it is by such movements
communicated to the nerves of our eyes that we see; nay, more, that
it is the DIFFERENCE in the frequency of their recurrence which
affects us with the sense of the diversity of colour; that, for
instance, in acquiring the sensation of redness, our eyes are
affected four hundred and eighty-two millions of millions of times;
of yellowness, five hundred and forty-two millions of millions of
times; and of violet, seven hundred and seven millions of millions of
times per second? {59b}  Do not such things sound more like the
ravings of madmen than the sober conclusions of people in their
waking senses?  They are, nevertheless, conclusions to which any one
may most certainly arrive who will only be at the pains of examining
the chain of reasoning by which they have been obtained."

A man counting as hard as he can repeat numbers one after another,
and never counting more than a hundred, so that he shall have no long
words to repeat, may perhaps count ten thousand, or a hundred a
hundred times over, in an hour.  At this rate, counting night and
day, and allowing no time for rest or refreshment, he would count one
million in four days and four hours, or say four days only.  To count
a million a million times over, he would require four million days,
or roughly ten thousand years; for five hundred millions of millions,
he must have the utterly unrealisable period of five million years.
Yet he actually goes through this stupendous piece of reckoning
unconsciously hour after hour, day after day, it may be for eighty
years, OFTEN IN EACH SECOND of daylight; and how much more by
artificial or subdued light I do not know.  He knows whether his eye
is being struck five hundred millions of millions of times, or only
four hundred and eighty-two millions of millions of times.  He thus
shows that he estimates or counts each set of vibrations, and
registers them according to his results.  If a man writes upon the
back of a British Museum blotting-pad of the common nonpareil
pattern, on which there are some thousands of small spaces each
differing in colour from that which is immediately next to it, his
eye will, nevertheless, without an effort assign its true colour to
each one of these spaces.  This implies that he is all the time
counting and taking tally of the difference in the numbers of the
vibrations from each one of the small spaces in question.  Yet the
mind that is capable of such stupendous computations as these so long
as it knows nothing about them, makes no little fuss about the
conscious adding together of such almost inconceivably minute numbers
as, we will say, 2730169 and 5790135--or, if these be considered too
large, as 27 and 19.  Let the reader remember that he cannot by any
effort bring before his mind the units, not in ones, BUT IN MILLIONS
OF MILLIONS of the processes which his visual organs are undergoing
second after second from dawn till dark, and then let him demur if he
will to the possibility of the existence in a germ, of currents and
undercurrents, and rhythms and counter rhythms, also by the million
of millions--each one of which, on being overtaken by the rhythm from
without that chimes in with and stimulates it, may be the beginning
of that unsettlement of equilibrium which results in the crash of
action, unless it is timely counteracted.

If another objector maintains that the vibrations within the germ as
above supposed must be continually crossing and interfering with one
another in such a manner as to destroy the continuity of any one
series, it may be replied that the vibrations of the light proceeding
from the objects that surround us traverse one another by the
millions of millions every second yet in no way interfere with one
another.  Nevertheless, it must be admitted that the difficulties of
the theory towards which I suppose Professor Hering to incline are
like those of all other theories on the same subject--almost
inconceivably great.

In "Life and Habit" I did not touch upon these vibrations, knowing
nothing about them.  Here, then, is one important point of
difference, not between the conclusions arrived at, but between the
aim and scope of the work that Professor Hering and I severally
attempted.  Another difference consists in the points at which we
have left off.  Professor Hering, having established his main thesis,
is content.  I, on the other hand, went on to maintain that if vigour
was due to memory, want of vigour was due to want of memory.  Thus I
was led to connect memory with the phenomena of hybridism and of old
age; to show that the sterility of certain animals under
domestication is only a phase of, and of a piece with, the very
common sterility of hybrids--phenomena which at first sight have no
connection either with each other or with memory, but the connection
between which will never be lost sight of by those who have once laid
hold of it.  I also pointed out how exactly the phenomena of
development agreed with those of the abeyance and recurrence of
memory, and the rationale of the fact that puberty in so many animals
and plants comes about the end of development.  The principle
underlying longevity follows as a matter of course.  I have no idea
how far Professor Hering would agree with me in the position I have
taken in respect of these phenomena, but there is nothing in the
above at variance with his lecture.

Another matter on which Professor Hering has not touched is the
bearing of his theory on that view of evolution which is now commonly
accepted.  It is plain he accepts evolution, but it does not appear
that he sees how fatal his theory is to any view of evolution except
a teleological one--the purpose residing within the animal and not
without it.  There is, however, nothing in his lecture to indicate
that he does not see this.

It should be remembered that the question whether memory is due to
the persistence within the body of certain vibrations, which have
been already set up within the bodies of its ancestors, is true or
no, will not affect the position I took up in "Life and Habit."  In
that book I have maintained nothing more than that whatever memory is
heredity is also.  I am not committed to the vibration theory of
memory, though inclined to accept it on a prima facie view.  All I am
committed to is, that if memory is due to persistence of vibrations,
so is heredity; and if memory is not so due, then no more is
heredity.

Finally, I may say that Professor Hering's lecture, the passage
quoted from Dr. Erasmus Darwin on p. 26 of this volume, and a few
hints in the extracts from Mr. Patrick Mathew which I have quoted in
"Evolution, Old and New," are all that I yet know of in other writers
as pointing to the conclusion that the phenomena of heredity are
phenomena also of memory.


