
CHAPTER III



How I came to write "Evolution, Old and New"--Mr Darwin's "brief but
imperfect" sketch of the opinions of the writers on evolution who had
preceded him--The reception which "Evolution, Old and New," met with.

Though my book was out in 1877, it was not till January 1878 that I
took an opportunity of looking up Professor Ray Lankester's account
of Professor Hering's lecture.  I can hardly say how relieved I was
to find that it sprung no mine upon me, but that, so far as I could
gather, Professor Hering and I had come to pretty much the same
conclusion.  I had already found the passage in Dr. Erasmus Darwin
which I quoted in "Evolution, Old and New," but may perhaps as well
repeat it here.  It runs -


"Owing to the imperfection of language, the offspring is termed a new
animal; but is, in truth, a branch or elongation of the parent, since
a part of the embryon animal is or was a part of the parent, and,
therefore, in strict language, cannot be said to be entirely new at
the time of its production, and, therefore, it may retain some of the
habits of the parent system." {26}


When, then, the Athenaeum reviewed "Life and Habit" (January 26,
1878), I took the opportunity to write to that paper, calling
attention to Professor Hering's lecture, and also to the passage just
quoted from Dr. Erasmus Darwin.  The editor kindly inserted my letter
in his issue of February 9, 1878.  I felt that I had now done all in
the way of acknowledgment to Professor Hering which it was, for the
time, in my power to do.

I again took up Mr. Darwin's "Origin of Species," this time, I admit,
in a spirit of scepticism.  I read his "brief but imperfect" sketch
of the progress of opinion on the origin of species, and turned to
each one of the writers he had mentioned.  First, I read all the
parts of the "Zoonomia" that were not purely medical, and was
astonished to find that, as Dr. Krause has since said in his essay on
Erasmus Darwin, "HE WAS THE FIRST WHO PROPOSED AND PERSISTENTLY
CARRIED OUT A WELL-ROUNDED THEORY WITH REGARD TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF
THE LIVING WORLD" {27} (italics in original).

This is undoubtedly the case, and I was surprised at finding
Professor Huxley say concerning this very eminent man that he could
"hardly be said to have made any real advance upon his predecessors."
Still more was I surprised at remembering that, in the first edition
of the "Origin of Species," Dr. Erasmus Darwin had never been so much
as named; while in the "brief but imperfect" sketch he was dismissed
with a line of half-contemptuous patronage, as though the mingled
tribute of admiration and curiosity which attaches to scientific
prophecies, as distinguished from discoveries, was the utmost he was
entitled to.  "It is curious," says Mr. Darwin innocently, in the
middle of a note in the smallest possible type, "how largely my
grandfather, Dr. Erasmus Darwin, anticipated the views and erroneous
grounds of opinion of Lamarck in his 'Zoonomia' (vol. i. pp. 500-
510), published in 1794"; this was all he had to say about the
founder of "Darwinism," until I myself unearthed Dr. Erasmus Darwin,
and put his work fairly before the present generation in "Evolution,
Old and New."  Six months after I had done this, I had the
satisfaction of seeing that Mr. Darwin had woke up to the propriety
of doing much the same thing, and that he had published an
interesting and charmingly written memoir of his grandfather, of
which more anon.

Not that Dr. Darwin was the first to catch sight of a complete theory
of evolution.  Buffon was the first to point out that, in view of the
known modifications which had been effected among our domesticated
animals and cultivated plants, the ass and the horse should be
considered as, in all probability, descended from a common ancestor;
yet, if this is so, he writes--if the point "were once gained that
among animals and vegetables there had been, I do not say several
species, but even a single one, which had been produced in the course
of direct descent from another species; if, for example, it could be
once shown that the ass was but a degeneration from the horse, then
there is no further limit to be set to the power of Nature, and we
should not be wrong in supposing that, with sufficient time, she has
evolved all other organised forms from one primordial type" {28a} (et
l'on n'auroit pas tort de supposer, que d'un seul etre elle a su
tirer avec le temps tous les autres etres organises).

This, I imagine, in spite of Professor Huxley's dictum, is
contributing a good deal to the general doctrine of evolution; for
though Descartes and Leibnitz may have thrown out hints pointing more
or less broadly in the direction of evolution, some of which
Professor Huxley has quoted, he has adduced nothing approaching to
the passage from Buffon given above, either in respect of the
clearness with which the conclusion intended to be arrived at is
pointed out, or the breadth of view with which the whole ground of
animal and vegetable nature is covered.  The passage referred to is
only one of many to the same effect, and must be connected with one
quoted in "Evolution, Old and New," {28b} from p. 13 of Buffon's
first volume, which appeared in 1749, and than which nothing can well
point more plainly in the direction of evolution.  It is not easy,
therefore, to understand why Professor Huxley should give 1753-78 as
the date of Buffon's work, nor yet why he should say that Buffon was
"at first a partisan of the absolute immutability of species," {29a}
unless, indeed, we suppose he has been content to follow that very
unsatisfactory writer, Isidore Geoffroy St. Hilaire (who falls into
this error, and says that Buffon's first volume on animals appeared
1753), without verifying him, and without making any reference to
him.

Professor Huxley quotes a passage from the "Palingenesie
Philosophique" of Bonnet, of which he says that, making allowance for
his peculiar views on the subject of generation, they bear no small
resemblance to what is understood by "evolution" at the present day.
The most important parts of the passage quoted are as follows:-


"Should I be going too far if I were to conjecture that the plants
and animals of the present day have arisen by a sort of natural
evolution from the organised beings which peopled the world in its
original state as it left the hands of the Creator? . . .  In the
outset organised beings were probably very different from what they
are now--as different as the original world is from our present one.
We have no means of estimating the amount of these differences, but
it is possible that even our ablest naturalist, if transplanted to
the original world, would entirely fail to recognise our plants and
animals therein." {29b}


But this is feeble in comparison with Buffon, and did not appear till
1769, when Buffon had been writing on evolution for fully twenty
years with the eyes of scientific Europe upon him.  Whatever
concession to the opinion of Buffon Bonnet may have been inclined to
make in 1769, in 1764, when he published his "Contemplation de la
Nature," and in 1762 when his "Considerations sur les Corps Organes"
appeared, he cannot be considered to have been a supporter of
evolution.  I went through these works in 1878 when I was writing
"Evolution, Old and New," to see whether I could claim him as on my
side; but though frequently delighted with his work, I found it
impossible to press him into my service.

The pre-eminent claim of Buffon to be considered as the father of the
modern doctrine of evolution cannot be reasonably disputed, though he
was doubtless led to his conclusions by the works of Descartes and
Leibnitz, of both of whom he was an avowed and very warm admirer.
His claim does not rest upon a passage here or there, but upon the
spirit of forty quartos written over a period of about as many years.
Nevertheless he wrote, as I have shown in "Evolution, Old and New,"
of set purpose enigmatically, whereas there was no beating about the
bush with Dr. Darwin.  He speaks straight out, and Dr. Krause is
justified in saying of him "THAT HE WAS THE FIRST WHO PROPOSED AND
PERSISTENTLY CARRIED OUT A WELL-ROUNDED THEORY" of evolution.

I now turned to Lamarck.  I read the first volume of the "Philosophie
Zoologique," analysed it and translated the most important parts.
The second volume was beside my purpose, dealing as it does rather
with the origin of life than of species, and travelling too fast and
too far for me to be able to keep up with him.  Again I was
astonished at the little mention Mr. Darwin had made of this
illustrious writer, at the manner in which he had motioned him away,
as it were, with his hand in the first edition of the "Origin of
Species," and at the brevity and imperfection of the remarks made
upon him in the subsequent historical sketch.

I got Isidore Geoffroy's "Histoire Naturelle Generale," which Mr.
Darwin commends in the note on the second page of the historical
sketch, as giving "an excellent history of opinion" upon the subject
of evolution, and a full account of Buffon's conclusions upon the
same subject.  This at least is what I supposed Mr. Darwin to mean.
What he said was that Isidore Geoffroy gives an excellent history of
opinion on the subject of the date of the first publication of
Lamarck, and that in his work there is a full account of Buffon's
fluctuating conclusions upon THE SAME SUBJECT. {31}  But Mr. Darwin
is a more than commonly puzzling writer.  I read what M. Geoffroy had
to say upon Buffon, and was surprised to find that, after all,
according to M. Geoffroy, Buffon, and not Lamarck, was the founder of
the theory of evolution.  His name, as I have already said, was never
mentioned in the first edition of the "Origin of Species."

M. Geoffroy goes into the accusations of having fluctuated in his
opinions, which he tells us have been brought against Buffon, and
comes to the conclusion that they are unjust, as any one else will do
who turns to Buffon himself.  Mr. Darwin, however, in the "brief but
imperfect sketch," catches at the accusation, and repeats it while
saying nothing whatever about the defence.  The following is still
all he says:  "The first author who in modern times has treated"
evolution "in a scientific spirit was Buffon.  But as his opinions
fluctuated greatly at different periods, and as he does not enter on
the causes or means of the transformation of species, I need not here
enter on details."  On the next page, in the note last quoted, Mr.
Darwin originally repeated the accusation of Buffon's having been
fluctuating in his opinions, and appeared to give it the imprimatur
of Isidore Geoffroy's approval; the fact being that Isidore Geoffroy
only quoted the accusation in order to refute it; and though, I
suppose, meaning well, did not make half the case he might have done,
and abounds with misstatements.  My readers will find this matter
particularly dealt with in "Evolution, Old and New," Chapter X.

I gather that some one must have complained to Mr. Darwin of his
saying that Isidore Geoffroy gave an account of Buffon's "fluctuating
conclusions" concerning evolution, when he was doing all he knew to
maintain that Buffon's conclusions did not fluctuate; for I see that
in the edition of 1876 the word "fluctuating" has dropped out of the
note in question, and we now learn that Isidore Geoffroy gives "a
full account of Buffon's conclusions," without the "fluctuating."
But Buffon has not taken much by this, for his opinions are still
left fluctuating greatly at different periods on the preceding page,
and though he still was the first to treat evolution in a scientific
spirit, he still does not enter upon the causes or means of the
transformation of species.  No one can understand Mr. Darwin who does
not collate the different editions of the "Origin of Species" with
some attention.  When he has done this, he will know what Newton
meant by saying he felt like a child playing with pebbles upon the
seashore.

One word more upon this note before I leave it.  Mr. Darwin speaks of
Isidore Geoffroy's history of opinion as "excellent," and his account
of Buffon's opinions as "full."  I wonder how well qualified he is to
be a judge of these matters?  If he knows much about the earlier
writers, he is the more inexcusable for having said so little about
them.  If little, what is his opinion worth?

To return to the "brief but imperfect sketch."  I do not think I can
ever again be surprised at anything Mr. Darwin may say or do, but if
I could, I should wonder how a writer who did not "enter upon the
causes or means of the transformation of species," and whose opinions
"fluctuated greatly at different periods," can be held to have
treated evolution "in a scientific spirit."  Nevertheless, when I
reflect upon the scientific reputation Mr. Darwin has attained, and
the means by which he has won it, I suppose the scientific spirit
must be much what he here implies.  I see Mr. Darwin says of his own
father, Dr. Robert Darwin of Shrewsbury, that he does not consider
him to have had a scientific mind.  Mr. Darwin cannot tell why he
does not think his father's mind to have been fitted for advancing
science, "for he was fond of theorising, and was incomparably the
best observer" Mr. Darwin ever knew. {33a}  From the hint given in
the "brief but imperfect sketch," I fancy I can help Mr. Darwin to
see why he does not think his father's mind to have been a scientific
one.  It is possible that Dr. Robert Darwin's opinions did not
fluctuate sufficiently at different periods, and that Mr. Darwin
considered him as having in some way entered upon the causes or means
of the transformation of species.  Certainly those who read Mr.
Darwin's own works attentively will find no lack of fluctuation in
his case; and reflection will show them that a theory of evolution
which relies mainly on the accumulation of accidental variations
comes very close to not entering upon the causes or means of the
transformation of species. {33b}

I have shown, however, in "Evolution, Old and New," that the
assertion that Buffon does not enter on the causes or means of the
transformation of species is absolutely without foundation, and that,
on the contrary, he is continually dealing with this very matter, and
devotes to it one of his longest and most important chapters, {33c}
but I admit that he is less satisfactory on this head than either Dr.
Erasmus Darwin or Lamarck.

As a matter of fact, Buffon is much more of a Neo-Darwinian than
either Dr. Erasmus Darwin or Lamarck, for with him the variations are
sometimes fortuitous.  In the case of the dog, he speaks of them as
making their appearance "BY SOME CHANCE common enough with Nature,"
{33d} and being perpetuated by man's selection.  This is exactly the
"if any slight favourable variation HAPPEN to arise" of Mr. Charles
Darwin.  Buffon also speaks of the variations among pigeons arising
"par hasard."  But these expressions are only ships; his main cause
of variation is the direct action of changed conditions of existence,
while with Dr. Erasmus Darwin and Lamarck the action of the
conditions of existence is indirect, the direct action being that of
the animals or plants themselves, in consequence of changed sense of
need under changed conditions.

I should say that the sketch so often referred to is at first sight
now no longer imperfect in Mr. Darwin's opinion.  It was "brief but
imperfect" in 1861 and in 1866, but in 1876 I see that it is brief
only.  Of course, discovering that it was no longer imperfect, I
expected to find it briefer.  What, then, was my surprise at finding
that it had become rather longer?  I have found no perfectly
satisfactory explanation of this inconsistency, but, on the whole,
incline to think that the "greatest of living men" felt himself
unequal to prolonging his struggle with the word "but," and resolved
to lay that conjunction at all hazards, even though the doing so
might cost him the balance of his adjectives; for I think he must
know that his sketch is still imperfect.

From Isidore Geoffroy I turned to Buffon himself, and had not long to
wait before I felt that I was now brought into communication with the
master-mind of all those who have up to the present time busied
themselves with evolution.  For a brief and imperfect sketch of him,
I must refer my readers to "Evolution, Old and New."

I have no great respect for the author of the "Vestiges of Creation,"
who behaved hardly better to the writers upon whom his own work was
founded than Mr. Darwin himself has done.  Nevertheless, I could not
forget the gravity of the misrepresentation with which he was
assailed on page 3 of the first edition of the "Origin of Species,"
nor impugn the justice of his rejoinder in the following year, {34}
when he replied that it was to be regretted Mr. Darwin had read his
work "almost as much amiss as if, like its declared opponents, he had
an interest in misrepresenting it." {35a}  I could not, again, forget
that, though Mr. Darwin did not venture to stand by the passage in
question, it was expunged without a word of apology or explanation of
how it was that he had come to write it.  A writer with any claim to
our consideration will never fall into serious error about another
writer without hastening to make a public apology as soon as he
becomes aware of what he has done.

Reflecting upon the substance of what I have written in the last few
pages, I thought it right that people should have a chance of knowing
more about the earlier writers on evolution than they were likely to
hear from any of our leading scientists (no matter how many lectures
they may give on the coming of age of the "Origin of Species") except
Professor Mivart.  A book pointing the difference between
teleological and non-teleological views of evolution seemed likely to
be useful, and would afford me the opportunity I wanted for giving a
resume of the views of each one of the three chief founders of the
theory, and of contrasting them with those of Mr. Charles Darwin, as
well as for calling attention to Professor Hering's lecture.  I
accordingly wrote "Evolution, Old and New," which was prominently
announced in the leading literary periodicals at the end of February,
or on the very first days of March 1879, {35b} as "a comparison of
the theories of Buffon, Dr. Erasmus Darwin, and Lamarck, with that of
Mr. Charles Darwin, with copious extracts from the works of the three
first-named writers."  In this book I was hardly able to conceal the
fact that, in spite of the obligations under which we must always
remain to Mr. Darwin, I had lost my respect for him and for his work.

I should point out that this announcement, coupled with what I had
written in "Life and Habit," would enable Mr. Darwin and his friends
to form a pretty shrewd guess as to what I was likely to say, and to
quote from Dr. Erasmus Darwin in my forthcoming book.  The
announcement, indeed, would tell almost as much as the book itself to
those who knew the works of Erasmus Darwin.

As may be supposed, "Evolution, Old and New," met with a very
unfavourable reception at the hands of many of its reviewers.  The
Saturday Review was furious.  "When a writer," it exclaimed, "who has
not given as many weeks to the subject as Mr. Darwin has given years,
is not content to air his own crude though clever fallacies, but
assumes to criticise Mr. Darwin with the superciliousness of a young
schoolmaster looking over a boy's theme, it is difficult not to take
him more seriously than he deserves or perhaps desires.  One would
think that Mr. Butler was the travelled and laborious observer of
Nature, and Mr. Darwin the pert speculator who takes all his facts at
secondhand." {36}

The lady or gentleman who writes in such a strain as this should not
be too hard upon others whom she or he may consider to write like
schoolmasters.  It is true I have travelled--not much, but still as
much as many others, and have endeavoured to keep my eyes open to the
facts before me; but I cannot think that I made any reference to my
travels in "Evolution, Old and New."  I did not quite see what that
had to do with the matter.  A man may get to know a good deal without
ever going beyond the four-mile radius from Charing Cross.  Much less
did I imply that Mr. Darwin was pert:  pert is one of the last words
that can be applied to Mr. Darwin.  Nor, again, had I blamed him for
taking his facts at secondhand; no one is to be blamed for this,
provided he takes well-established facts and acknowledges his
sources.  Mr. Darwin has generally gone to good sources.  The ground
of complaint against him is that he muddied the water after he had
drawn it, and tacitly claimed to be the rightful owner of the spring,
on the score of the damage he had effected.

Notwithstanding, however, the generally hostile, or more or less
contemptuous, reception which "Evolution, Old and New," met with,
there were some reviews--as, for example, those in the Field, {37a}
the Daily Chronicle, {37b} the Athenaeum, {37c} the Journal of
Science, {37d} the British Journal of Homaeopathy, {37e} the Daily
News, {37f} the Popular Science Review {37g}--which were all I could
expect or wish.


