
CHAPTER XI



On Cycles.

The one faith on which all normal living beings consciously or
unconsciously act, is that like antecedents will be followed by like
consequents.  This is the one true and catholic faith,
undemonstrable, but except a living being believe which, without
doubt it shall perish everlastingly.  In the assurance of this all
action is taken.

But if this fundamental article is admitted, and it cannot be
gainsaid, it follows that if ever a complete cycle were formed, so
that the whole universe of one instant were to repeat itself
absolutely in a subsequent one, no matter after what interval of
time, then the course of the events between these two moments would
go on repeating itself for ever and ever afterwards in due order,
down to the minutest detail, in an endless series of cycles like a
circulating decimal.  For the universe comprises everything; there
could therefore be no disturbance from without.  Once a cycle, always
a cycle.

Let us suppose the earth, of given weight, moving with given momentum
in a given path, and under given conditions in every respect, to find
itself at any one time conditioned in all these respects as it was
conditioned at some past moment; then it must move exactly in the
same path as the one it took when at the beginning of the cycle it
has just completed, and must therefore in the course of time fulfil a
second cycle, and therefore a third, and so on for ever and ever,
with no more chance of escape than a circulating decimal has, if the
circumstances have been reproduced with perfect accuracy.

We see something very like this actually happen in the yearly
revolutions of the planets round the sun.  But the relations between,
we will say, the earth and the sun are not reproduced absolutely.
These relations deal only with a small part of the universe, and even
in this small part the relation of the parts inter se has never yet
been reproduced with the perfection of accuracy necessary for our
argument.  They are liable, moreover, to disturbance from events
which may or may not actually occur (as, for example, our being
struck by a comet, or the sun's coming within a certain distance of
another sun), but of which, if they do occur, no one can foresee the
effects.  Nevertheless the conditions have been so nearly repeated
that there is no appreciable difference in the relations between the
earth and sun on one New Year's Day and on another, nor is there
reason for expecting such change within any reasonable time.

If there is to be an eternal series of cycles involving the whole
universe, it is plain that not one single atom must be excluded.
Exclude a single molecule of hydrogen from the ring, or vary the
relative positions of two molecules only, and the charm is broken; an
element of disturbance has been introduced, of which the utmost that
can be said is that it may not prevent the ensuing of a long series
of very nearly perfect cycles before similarity in recurrence is
destroyed, but which must inevitably prevent absolute identity of
repetition.  The movement of the series becomes no longer a cycle,
but spiral, and convergent or divergent at a greater or less rate
according to circumstances.  We cannot conceive of all the atoms in
the universe standing twice over in absolutely the same relation each
one of them to every other.  There are too many of them and they are
too much mixed; but, as has been just said, in the planets and their
satellites we do see large groups of atoms whose movements recur with
some approach to precision.  The same holds good also with certain
comets and with the sun himself.  The result is that our days and
nights and seasons follow one another with nearly perfect regularity
from year to year, and have done so for as long time as we know
anything for certain.  A vast preponderance of all the action that
takes place around us is cycular action.

Within the great cycle of the planetary revolution of our own earth,
and as a consequence thereof, we have the minor cycle of the
phenomena of the seasons; these generate atmospheric cycles.  Water
is evaporated from the ocean and conveyed to mountain ranges, where
it is cooled, and whence it returns again to the sea.  This cycle of
events is being repeated again and again with little appreciable
variation.  The tides and winds in certain latitudes go round and
round the world with what amounts to continuous regularity.--There
are storms of wind and rain called cyclones.  In the case of these,
the cycle is not very complete, the movement, therefore, is spiral,
and the tendency to recur is comparatively soon lost.  It is a common
saying that history repeats itself, so that anarchy will lead to
despotism and despotism to anarchy; every nation can point to
instances of men's minds having gone round and round so nearly in a
perfect cycle that many revolutions have occurred before the
cessation of a tendency to recur.  Lastly, in the generation of
plants and animals we have, perhaps, the most striking and common
example of the inevitable tendency of all action to repeat itself
when it has once proximately done so.  Let only one living being have
once succeeded in producing a being like itself, and thus have
returned, so to speak, upon itself, and a series of generations must
follow of necessity, unless some matter interfere which had no part
in the original combination, and, as it may happen, kill the first
reproductive creature or all its descendants within a few
generations.  If no such mishap occurs as this, and if the recurrence
of the conditions is sufficiently perfect, a series of generations
follows with as much certainty as a series of seasons follows upon
the cycle of the relations between the earth and sun.  Let the first
periodically recurring substance--we will say A--be able to recur or
reproduce itself, not once only, but many times over, as A1, A2, &c.;
let A also have consciousness and a sense of self-interest, which
qualities must, ex hypothesi, be reproduced in each one of its
offspring; let these get placed in circumstances which differ
sufficiently to destroy the cycle in theory without doing so
practically--that is to say, to reduce the rotation to a spiral, but
to a spiral with so little deviation from perfect cycularity as for
each revolution to appear practically a cycle, though after many
revolutions the deviation becomes perceptible; then some such
differentiations of animal and vegetable life as we actually see
follow as matters of course.  A1 and A2 have a sense of self-interest
as A had, but they are not precisely in circumstances similar to A's,
nor, it may be, to each other's; they will therefore act somewhat
differently, and every living being is modified by a change of
action.  Having become modified, they follow the spirit of A's action
more essentially in begetting a creature like themselves than in
begetting one like A; for the essence of A's act was not the
reproduction of A, but the reproduction of a creature like the one
from which it sprung--that is to say, a creature bearing traces in
its body of the main influences that have worked upon its parent.

Within the cycle of reproduction there are cycles upon cycles in the
life of each individual, whether animal or plant.  Observe the action
of our lungs and heart, how regular it is, and how a cycle having
been once established, it is repeated many millions of times in an
individual of average health and longevity.  Remember also that it is
this periodicity--this inevitable tendency of all atoms in
combination to repeat any combination which they have once repeated,
unless forcibly prevented from doing so--which alone renders nine-
tenths of our mechanical inventions of practical use to us.  There is
no internal periodicity about a hammer or a saw, but there is in the
steam-engine or watermill when once set in motion.  The actions of
these machines recur in a regular series, at regular intervals, with
the unerringness of circulating decimals.

When we bear in mind, then, the omnipresence of this tendency in the
world around us, the absolute freedom from exception which attends
its action, the manner in which it holds equally good upon the
vastest and the smallest scale, and the completeness of its accord
with our ideas of what must inevitably happen when a like combination
is placed in circumstances like those in which it was placed before--
when we bear in mind all this, is it possible not to connect the
facts together, and to refer cycles of living generations to the same
unalterableness in the action of like matter under like circumstances
which makes Jupiter and Saturn revolve round the sun, or the piston
of a steam-engine move up and down as long as the steam acts upon it?

But who will attribute memory to the hands of a clock, to a piston-
rod, to air or water in a storm or in course of evaporation, to the
earth and planets in their circuits round the sun, or to the atoms of
the universe, if they too be moving in a cycle vaster than we can
take account of? {160}  And if not, why introduce it into the
embryonic development of living beings, when there is not a particle
of evidence in support of its actual presence, when regularity of
action can be ensured just as well without it as with it, and when at
the best it is considered as existing under circumstances which it
baffles us to conceive, inasmuch as it is supposed to be exercised
without any conscious recollection?  Surely a memory which is
exercised without any consciousness of recollecting is only a
periphrasis for the absence of any memory at all.


