

III.  The outcome of an unconscious activity of mind.

In neither of the two first cases is there any scope for the idea of
purpose; in the third, purpose must be present immediately before the
action.  In the two first cases, action is supposed to be brought
about by means of an initial arrangement, either of bodily or mental
mechanism, purpose being conceived of as existing on a single
occasion only--that is to say, in the determination of the initial
arrangement.  In the third, purpose is conceived as present in every
individual instance.  Let us proceed to the consideration of these
three cases.

Instinct is not a mere consequence of bodily organisation; for -

(a.)  Bodies may be alike, yet they may be endowed with different
instincts.

All spiders have the same spinning apparatus, but one kind weaves
radiating webs, another irregular ones, while a third makes none at
all, but lives in holes, whose walls it overspins, and whose entrance
it closes with a door.  Almost all birds have a like organisation for
the construction of their nests (a beak and feet), but how infinitely
do their nests vary in appearance, mode of construction, attachment
to surrounding objects (they stand, are glued on, hang, &c.),
selection of site (caves, holes, corners, forks of trees, shrubs, the
ground), and excellence of workmanship; how often, too, are they not
varied in the species of a single genus, as of parus.  Many birds,
moreover, build no nest at all.  The difference in the songs of birds
are in like manner independent of the special construction of their
voice apparatus, nor do the modes of nest construction that obtain
among ants and bees depend upon their bodily organisation.
Organisation, as a general rule, only renders the bird capable of
singing, as giving it an apparatus with which to sing at all, but it
has nothing to do with the specific character of the execution . . .
The nursing, defence, and education of offspring cannot be considered
as in any way more dependent upon bodily organisation; nor yet the
sites which insects choose for the laying of their eggs; nor, again,
the selection of deposits of spawn, of their own species, by male
fish for impregnation.  The rabbit burrows, the hare does not, though
both have the same burrowing apparatus.  The hare, however, has less
need of a subterranean place of refuge by reason of its greater
swiftness.  Some birds, with excellent powers of flight, are
nevertheless stationary in their habits, as the secretary falcon and
certain other birds of prey; while even such moderate fliers as
quails are sometimes known to make very distant migrations.

(b.) Like instincts may be found associated with unlike organs.

Birds with and without feet adapted for climbing live in trees; so
also do monkeys with and without flexible tails, squirrels, sloths,
pumas, &c.  Mole-crickets dig with a well-pronounced spade upon their
fore-feet, while the burying-beetle does the same thing though it has
no special apparatus whatever.  The mole conveys its winter provender
in pockets, an inch wide, long and half an inch wide within its
cheeks; the field-mouse does so without the help of any such
contrivance.  The migratory instinct displays itself with equal
strength in animals of widely different form, by whatever means they
may pursue their journey, whether by water, land, or air.

It is clear, therefore, that instinct is in great measure independent
of bodily organisation.  Granted, indeed, that a certain amount of
bodily apparatus is a sine qua non for any power of execution at all-
-as, for example, that there would be no ingenious nest without
organs more or less adapted for its construction, no spinning of a
web without spinning glands--nevertheless, it is impossible to
maintain that instinct is a consequence of organisation.  The mere
existence of the organ does not constitute even the smallest
incentive to any corresponding habitual activity.  A sensation of
pleasure must at least accompany the use of the organ before its
existence can incite to its employment.  And even so when a sensation
of pleasure has given the impulse which is to render it active, it is
only the fact of there being activity at all, and not the special
characteristics of the activity, that can be due to organisation.
The reason for the special mode of the activity is the very problem
that we have to solve.  No one will call the action of the spider
instinctive in voiding the fluid from her spinning gland when it is
too full, and therefore painful to her; nor that of the male fish
when it does what amounts to much the same thing as this.  The
instinct and the marvel lie in the fact that the spider spins
threads, and proceeds to weave her web with them, and that the male
fish will only impregnate ova of his own species.

Another proof that the pleasure felt in the employment of an organ is
wholly inadequate to account for this employment is to be found in
the fact that the moral greatness of instinct, the point in respect
of which it most commands our admiration, consists in the obedience
paid to its behests, to the postponement of all personal well-being,
and at the cost, it may be, of life itself.  If the mere pleasure of
relieving certain glands from overfulness were the reason why
caterpillars generally spin webs, they would go on spinning until
they had relieved these glands, but they would not repair their work
as often as any one destroyed it, and do this again and again until
they die of exhaustion.  The same holds good with the other instincts
that at first sight appear to be inspired only by a sensation of
pleasure; for if we change the circumstances, so as to put self-
sacrifice in the place of self-interest, it becomes at once apparent
that they have a higher source than this.  We think, for example,
that birds pair for the sake of mere sexual gratification; why, then,
do they leave off pairing as soon as they have laid the requisite
number of eggs?  That there is a reproductive instinct over and above
the desire for sexual gratification appears from the fact that if a
man takes an egg out of the nest, the birds will come together again
and the hen will lay another egg; or, if they belong to some of the
more wary species, they will desert their nest, and make preparation
for an entirely new brood.  A female wryneck, whose nest was daily
robbed of the egg she laid in it, continued to lay a new one, which
grew smaller and smaller, till, when she had laid her twenty-ninth
egg, she was found dead upon her nest.  If an instinct cannot stand
the test of self-sacrifice--if it is the simple outcome of a desire
for bodily gratification--then it is no true instinct, and is only so
called erroneously.

Instinct is not a mechanism of brain or mind implanted in living
beings by nature; for, if it were, then instinctive action without
any, even unconscious, activity of mind, and with no conception
concerning the purpose of the action, would be executed mechanically,
the purpose having been once for all thought out by Nature or
Providence, which has so organised the individual that it acts
henceforth as a purely mechanical medium.  We are now dealing with a
psychical organisation as the cause instinct, as we were above
dealing with a physical. psychical organisation would be a
conceivable explanation and we need look no farther if every instinct
once belonging to an animal discharged its functions in an unvarying
manner.  But this is never found to be the case, for instincts vary
when there arises a sufficient motive for varying them.  This proves
that special exterior circumstances enter into the matter, and that
these circumstances are the very things that render the attainment of
the purpose possible through means selected by the instinct.  Here
first do we find instinct acting as though it were actually design
with action following at its heels, for until the arrival of the
motive, the instinct remains late and discharges no function
whatever.  The motive enters by way of an idea received into the mind
through the instrumentality of the senses, and there is a constant
connection between instinct in action and all sensual images which
give information that an opportunity has arisen for attaining the
ends proposed to itself by the instinct.

The psychical mechanism of this constant connection must also be
looked for.  It may help us here to turn to the piano for an
illustration.  The struck keys are the motives, the notes that sound
in consequence are the instincts in action.  This illustration might
perhaps be allowed to pass (if we also suppose that entirely
different keys can give out the same sound) if instincts could only
be compared with DISTINCTLY TUNED notes, so that one and the same
instinct acted always in the same manner on the rising of the motive
which should set it in action.  This, however, is not so; for it is
the blind unconscious purpose of the instinct that is alone constant,
the instinct itself--that is to say, the will to make use of certain
means--varying as the means that can be most suitably employed vary
under varying circumstances.

In this we condemn the theory which refuses to recognise unconscious
purpose as present in each individual case of instinctive action.
For he who maintains instinct to be the result of a mechanism of
mind, must suppose a special and constant mechanism for each
variation and modification of the instinct in accordance with
exterior circumstances, {97} that is to say, a new string giving a
note with a new tone must be inserted, and this would involve the
mechanism in endless complication.  But the fact that the purpose is
constant notwithstanding all manner of variation in the means chosen
by the instinct, proves that there is no necessity for the
supposition of such an elaborate mental mechanism--the presence of an
unconscious purpose being sufficient to explain the facts.  The
purpose of the bird, for example, that has laid her eggs is constant,
and consists in the desire to bring her young to maturity.  When the
temperature of the air is insufficient to effect this, she sits upon
her eggs, and only intermits her sittings in the warmest countries;
the mammal, on the other hand, attains the fulfilment of its
instinctive purpose without any co-operation on its own part.  In
warm climates many birds only sit by night, and small exotic birds
that have built in aviaries kept at a high temperature sit little
upon their eggs or not at all.  How inconceivable is the supposition
of a mechanism that impels the bird to sit as soon as the temperature
falls below a certain height!  How clear and simple, on the other
hand, is the view that there is an unconscious purpose constraining
the volition of the bird to the use of the fitting means, of which
process, however, only the last link, that is to say, the will
immediately preceding the action falls within the consciousness of
the bird!

In South Africa the sparrow surrounds her nest with thorns as a
defence against apes and serpents.  The eggs of the cuckoo, as
regards size, colour, and marking, invariably resemble those of the
birds in whose nests she lays.  Sylvia ruja, for example, lays a
white egg with violet spots; Sylvia hippolais, a red one with black
spots; Regulus ignicapellus, a cloudy red; but the cuckoo's egg is in
each case so deceptive an imitation of its model, that it can hardly
be distinguished except by the structure of its shell.

Huber contrived that his bees should be unable to build in their
usual instinctive manner, beginning from above and working downwards;
on this they began building from below, and again horizontally.  The
outermost cells that spring from the top of the hive or abut against
its sides are not hexagonal, but pentagonal, so as to gain in
strength, being attached with one base instead of two sides.  In
autumn bees lengthen their existing honey cells if these are
insufficient, but in the ensuing spring they again shorten them in
order to get greater roadway between the combs.  When the full combs
have become too heavy, they strengthen the walls of the uppermost or
bearing cells by thickening them with wax and propolis.  If larvae of
working bees are introduced into the cells set apart for drones, the
working bees will cover these cells with the flat lids usual for this
kind of larvae, and not with the round ones that are proper for
drones.  In autumn, as a general rule, bees kill their drones, but
they refrain from doing this when they have lost their queen, and
keep them to fertilise the young queen, who will be developed from
larvae that would otherwise have become working bees.  Huber observed
that they defend the entrance of their hive against the inroads of
the sphinx moth by means of skilful constructions made of wax and
propolis.  They only introduce propolis when they want it for the
execution of repairs, or for some other special purpose.  Spiders and
caterpillars also display marvellous dexterity in the repair of their
webs if they have been damaged, and this requires powers perfectly
distinct from those requisite for the construction of a new one.

The above examples might be multiplied indefinitely, but they are
sufficient to establish the fact that instincts are not capacities
rolled, as it were, off a reel mechanically, according to an
invariable system, but that they adapt themselves most closely to the
circumstances of each case, and are capable of such great
modification and variation that at times they almost appear to cease
to be instinctive.

Many will, indeed, ascribe these modifications to conscious
deliberation on the part of the animals themselves, and it is
impossible to deny that in the case of the more intellectually gifted
animals there may be such a thing as a combination of instinctive
faculty and conscious reflection.  I think, however, the examples
already cited are enough to show that often where the normal and the
abnormal action springs from the same source, without any
complication with conscious deliberation, they are either both
instinctive or both deliberative. {99}  Or is that which prompts the
bee to build hexagonal prisms in the middle of her comb something of
an actually distinct character from that which impels her to build
pentagonal ones at the sides?  Are there two separate kinds of thing,
one of which induces birds under certain circumstances to sit upon
their eggs, while another leads them under certain other
circumstances to refrain from doing so?  And does this hold good also
with bees when they at one time kill their brethren without mercy and
at another grant them their lives?  Or with birds when they construct
the kind of nest peculiar to their race, and, again, any special
provision which they may think fit under certain circumstances to
take?  If it is once granted that the normal and the abnormal
manifestations of instinct--and they are often incapable of being
distinguished--spring from a single source, then the objection that
the modification is due to conscious knowledge will be found to be a
suicidal one later on, so far as it is directed against instinct
generally.  It may be sufficient here to point out, in anticipation
of remarks that will be found in later chapters, that instinct and
the power of organic development involve the same essential
principle, though operating under different circumstances--the two
melting into one another without any definite boundary between them.
Here, then, we have conclusive proof that instinct does not depend
upon organisation of body or brain, but that, more truly, the
organisation is due to the nature and manner of the instinct.

On the other hand, we must now return to a closer consideration of
the conception of a psychical mechanism. {100}  And here we find that
this mechanism, in spite of its explaining so much, is itself so
obscure that we can hardly form any idea concerning it.  The motive
enters the mind by way of a conscious sensual impression; this is the
first link of the process; the last link {101} appears as the
conscious motive of an action.  Both, however, are entirely unlike,
and neither has anything to do with ordinary motivation, which
consists exclusively in the desire that springs from a conception
either of pleasure or dislike--the former prompting to the attainment
of any object, the latter to its avoidance.  In the case of instinct,
pleasure is for the most part a concomitant phenomenon; but it is not
so always, as we have already seen, inasmuch as the consummation and
highest moral development of instinct displays itself in self-
sacrifice.

The true problem, however, lies far deeper than this.  For every
conception of a pleasure proves that we have experienced this
pleasure already.  But it follows from this, that when the pleasure
was first felt there must have been will present, in the
gratification of which will the pleasure consisted; the question,
therefore, arises, whence did the will come before the pleasure that
would follow on its gratification was known, and before bodily pain,
as, for example, of hunger, rendered relief imperative?  Yet we may
see that even though an animal has grown up apart from any others of
its kind, it will yet none the less manifest the instinctive impulses
of its race, though experience can have taught it nothing whatever
concerning the pleasure that will ensue upon their gratification.  As
regards instinct, therefore, there must be a causal connection
between the motivating sensual conception and the will to perform the
instinctive action, and the pleasure of the subsequent gratification
has nothing to do with the matter.  We know by the experience of our
own instincts that this causal connection does not lie within our
consciousness; {102a} therefore, if it is to be a mechanism of any
kind, it can only be either an unconscious mechanical induction and
metamorphosis of the vibrations of the conceived motive into the
vibrations of the conscious action in the brain, or an unconscious
spiritual mechanism.

In the first case, it is surely strange that this process should go
on unconsciously, though it is so powerful in its effects that the
will resulting from it overpowers every other consideration, every
other kind of will, and that vibrations of this kind, when set up in
the brain, become always consciously perceived; nor is it easy to
conceive in what way this metamorphosis can take place so that the
constant purpose can be attained under varying circumstances by the
resulting will in modes that vary with variation of the special
features of each individual case.

But if we take the other alternative, and suppose an unconscious
mental mechanism, we cannot legitimately conceive of the process
going on in this as other than what prevails in all mental mechanism,
namely, than as by way of idea and will.  We are, therefore,
compelled to imagine a causal connection between the consciously
recognised motive and the will to do the instinctive action, through
unconscious idea and will; nor do I know how this connection can be
conceived as being brought about more simply than through a conceived
and willed purpose. {102b}  Arrived at this point, however, we have
attained the logical mechanism peculiar to and inseparable from all
mind, and find unconscious purpose to be an indispensable link in
every instinctive action.  With this, therefore, the conception of a
mental mechanism, dead and predestined from without, has disappeared,
and has become transformed into the spiritual life inseparable from
logic, so that we have reached the sole remaining requirement for the
conception of an actual instinct, which proves to be a conscious
willing of the means towards an unconsciously willed purpose.  This
conception explains clearly and without violence all the problems
which instinct presents to us; or more truly, all that was
problematical about instinct disappears when its true nature has been
thus declared.  If this work were confined to the consideration of
instinct alone, the conception of an unconscious activity of mind
might excite opposition, inasmuch as it is one with which our
educated public is not yet familiar; but in a work like the present,
every chapter of which adduces fresh facts in support of the
existence of such an activity and of its remarkable consequences, the
novelty of the theory should be taken no farther into consideration.

Though I so confidently deny that instinct is the simple action of a
mechanism which has been contrived once for all, I by no means
exclude the supposition that in the constitution of the brain, the
ganglia, and the whole body, in respect of morphological as well as
molecular-physiological condition, certain predispositions can be
established which direct the unconscious intermediaries more readily
into one channel than into another.  This predisposition is either
the result of a habit which keeps continually cutting for itself a
deeper and deeper channel, until in the end it leaves indelible
traces whether in the individual or in the race, or it is expressly
called into being by the unconscious formative principle in
generation, so as to facilitate action in a given direction.  This
last will be the case more frequently in respect of exterior
organisation--as, for example, with the weapons or working organs of
animals--while to the former must be referred the molecular condition
of brain and ganglia which bring about the perpetually recurring
elements of an instinct such as the hexagonal shape of the cells of
bees.  We shall presently see that by individual character we mean
the sum of the individual methods of reaction against all possible
motives, and that this character depends essentially upon a
constitution of mind and body acquired in some measure through habit
by the individual, but for the most part inherited.  But an instinct
is also a mode of reaction against certain motives; here, too, then,
we are dealing with character, though perhaps not so much with that
of the individual as of the race; for by character in regard to
instinct we do not intend the differences that distinguish
individuals, but races from one another.  If any one chooses to
maintain that such a predisposition for certain kinds of activity on
the part of brain and body constitutes a mechanism, this may in one
sense be admitted; but as against this view it must be remarked -

1.  That such deviations from the normal scheme of an instinct as
cannot be referred to conscious deliberation are not provided for by
any predisposition in this mechanism.

2.  That heredity is only possible under the circumstances of a
constant superintendence of the embryonic development by a purposive
unconscious activity of growth.  It must be admitted, however, that
this is influenced in return by the predisposition existing in the
germ.

3.  That the impressing of the predisposition upon the individual
from whom it is inherited can only be effected by long practice,
consequently the instinct without auxiliary mechanism {105a} is the
originating cause of the auxiliary mechanism.

4.  That none of those instinctive actions that are performed rarely,
or perhaps once only, in the lifetime of any individual--as, for
example, those connected with the propagation and metamorphoses of
the lower forms of life, and none of those instinctive omissions of
action, neglect of which necessarily entails death--can be conceived
as having become engrained into the character through habit; the
ganglionic constitution, therefore, that predisposes the animal
towards them must have been fashioned purposively.

5.  That even the presence of an auxiliary mechanism {105b} does not
compel the unconscious to a particular corresponding mode of
instinctive action, but only predisposes it.  This is shown by the
possibility of departure from the normal type of action, so that the
unconscious purpose is always stronger than the ganglionic
constitution, and takes any opportunity of choosing from several
similar possible courses the one that is handiest and most convenient
to the constitution of the individual.

We now approach the question that I have reserved for our final one,-
-Is there, namely, actually such a thing as instinct, {105c} or are
all so-called instinctive actions only the results of conscious
deliberation?

In support of the second of these two views, it may be alleged that
the more limited is the range of the conscious mental activity of any
living being, the more fully developed in proportion to its entire
mental power is its performance commonly found to be in respect of
its own limited and special instinctive department.  This holds as
good with the lower animals as with men, and is explained by the fact
that perfection of proficiency is only partly dependent upon natural
capacity, but is in great measure due to practice and cultivation of
the original faculty.  A philologist, for example, is unskilled in
questions of jurisprudence; a natural philosopher or mathematician,
in philology; an abstract philosopher, in poetical criticism.  Nor
has this anything to do with the natural talents of the several
persons, but follows as a consequence of their special training.  The
more special, therefore, is the direction in which the mental
activity of any living being is exercised, the more will the whole
developing and practising power of the mind be brought to bear upon
this one branch, so that it is not surprising if the special power
comes ultimately to bear an increased proportion to the total power
of the individual, through the contraction of the range within which
it is exercised.

Those, however, who apply this to the elucidation of instinct should
not forget the words, "in proportion to the entire mental power of
the animal in question," and should bear in mind that the entire
mental power becomes less and less continually as we descend the
scale of animal life, whereas proficiency in the performance of an
instinctive action seems to be much of a muchness in all grades of
the animal world.  As, therefore, those performances which
indisputably proceed from conscious deliberation decrease
proportionately with decrease of mental power, while nothing of the
kind is observable in the case of instinct--it follows that instinct
must involve some other principle than that of conscious
intelligence.  We see, moreover, that actions which have their source
in conscious intelligence are of one and the same kind, whether among
the lower animals or with mankind--that is to say, that they are
acquired by apprenticeship or instruction and perfected by practice;
so that the saying, "Age brings wisdom," holds good with the brutes
as much as with ourselves.  Instinctive actions, on the contrary,
have a special and distinct character, in that they are performed
with no less proficiency by animals that have been reared in solitude
than by those that have been instructed by their parents, the first
essays of a hitherto unpractised animal being as successful as its
later ones.  There is a difference in principle here which cannot be
mistaken.  Again, we know by experience that the feebler and more
limited an intelligence is, the more slowly do ideas act upon it,
that is to say, the slower and more laborious is its conscious
thought.  So long as instinct does not come into play, this holds
good both in the case of men of different powers of comprehension and
with animals; but with instinct all is changed, for it is the
speciality of instinct never to hesitate or loiter, but to take
action instantly upon perceiving that the stimulating motive has made
its appearance.  This rapidity in arriving at a resolution is common
to the instinctive actions both of the highest and the lowest
animals, and indicates an essential difference between instinct and
conscious deliberation.

Finally, as regards perfection of the power of execution, a glance
will suffice to show the disproportion that exists between this and
the grade of intellectual activity on which an animal may be
standing.  Take, for instance, the caterpillar of the emperor moth
(Saturnia pavonia minor).  It eats the leaves of the bush upon which
it was born; at the utmost has just enough sense to get on to the
lower sides of the leaves if it begins to rain, and from time to time
changes its skin.  This is its whole existence, which certainly does
not lead us to expect a display of any, even the most limited,
intellectual power.  When, however, the time comes for the larva of
this moth to become a chrysalis, it spins for itself a double cocoon,
fortified with bristles that point outwards, so that it can be opened
easily from within, though it is sufficiently impenetrable from
without.  If this contrivance were the result of conscious
reflection, we should have to suppose some such reasoning process as
the following to take place in the mind of the caterpillar:- "I am
about to become a chrysalis, and, motionless as I must be, shall be
exposed to many different kinds of attack.  I must therefore weave
myself a web.  But when I am a moth I shall not be able, as some
moths are, to find my way out of it by chemical or mechanical means;
therefore I must leave a way open for myself.  In order, however,
that my enemies may not take advantage of this, I will close it with
elastic bristles, which I can easily push asunder from within, but
which, upon the principle of the arch, will resist all pressure from
without."  Surely this is asking rather too much from a poor
caterpillar; yet the whole of the foregoing must be thought out if a
correct result is to be arrived at.

This theoretical separation of instinct from conscious intelligence
can be easily misrepresented by opponents of my theory, as though a
separation in practice also would be necessitated in consequence.
This is by no means my intention.  On the contrary, I have already
insisted at some length that both the two kinds of mental activity
may co-exist in all manner of different proportions, so that there
may be every degree of combination, from pure instinct to pure
deliberation.  We shall see, however, in a later chapter, that even
in the highest and most abstract activity of human consciousness
there are forces at work that are of the highest importance, and are
essentially of the same kind as instinct.

On the other hand, the most marvellous displays of instinct are to be
found not only in plants, but also in those lowest organisms of the
simplest bodily form which are partly unicellular, and in respect of
conscious intelligence stand far below the higher plants--to which,
indeed, any kind of deliberative faculty is commonly denied.  Even in
the case of those minute microscopic organisms that baffle our
attempts to classify them either as animals or vegetables, we are
still compelled to admire an instinctive, purposive behaviour, which
goes far beyond a mere reflex responsive to a stimulus from without;
all doubt, therefore, concerning the actual existence of an instinct
must be at an end, and the attempt to deduce it as a consequence of
conscious deliberation be given up as hopeless.  I will here adduce
an instance as extraordinary as any we yet know of, showing, as it
does, that many different purposes, which in the case of the higher
animals require a complicated system of organs of motion, can be
attained with incredibly simple means.

Arcella vulgaris is a minute morsel of protoplasm, which lives in a
concave-convex, brown, finely reticulated shell, through a circular
opening in the concave side of which it can project itself by
throwing out pseudopodia.  If we look through the microscope at a
drop of water containing living arcellae, we may happen to see one of
them lying on its back at the bottom of the drop, and making
fruitless efforts for two or three minutes to lay hold of some fixed
point by means of a pseudopodium.  After this there will appear
suddenly from two to five, but sometimes more, dark points in the
protoplasm at a small distance from the circumference, and, as a
rule, at regular distances from one another.  These rapidly develop
themselves into well-defined spherical air vesicles, and come
presently to fill a considerable part of the hollow of the shell,
thereby driving part of the protoplasm outside it.  After from five
to twenty minutes, the specific gravity of the arcella is so much
lessened that it is lifted by the water with its pseudopodia, and
brought up against the upper surface of the water-drop, on which it
is able to travel.  In from five to ten minutes the vesicles will now
disappear, the last small point vanishing with a jerk.  If, however,
the creature has been accidentally turned over during its journey,
and reaches the top of the water-drop with its back uppermost, the
vesicles will continue growing only on one side, while they diminish
on the other; by this means the shell is brought first into an
oblique and then into a vertical position, until one of the
pseudopodia obtains a footing and the whole turns over.  From the
moment the animal has obtained foothold, the bladders become
immediately smaller, and after they have disappeared the experiment
may be repeated at pleasure.

The positions of the protoplasm which the vesicles fashion change
continually; only the grainless protoplasm of the pseudopodia
develops no air.  After long and fruitless efforts a manifest fatigue
sets in; the animal gives up the attempt for a time, and resumes it
after an interval of repose.

Engelmann, the discoverer of these phenomena, says (Pfluger's Archiv
fur Physologie, Bd. II.):  "The changes in volume in all the vesicles
of the same animal are for the most part synchronous, effected in the
same manner, and of like size.  There are, however, not a few
exceptions; it often happens that some of them increase or diminish
in volume much faster than others; sometimes one may increase while
another diminishes; all the changes, however, are throughout
unquestionably intentional.  The object of the air-vesicles is to
bring the animal into such a position that it can take fast hold of
something with its pseudopodia.  When this has been obtained, the air
disappears without our being able to discover any other reason for
its disappearance than the fact that it is no longer needed. . . .
If we bear these circumstances in mind, we can almost always tell
whether an arcella will develop air-vesicles or no; and if it has
already developed them, we can tell whether they will increase or
diminish . . . The arcellae, in fact, in this power of altering their
specific gravity possess a mechanism for raising themselves to the
top of the water, or lowering themselves to the bottom at will.  They
use this not only in the abnormal circumstances of their being under
microscopical observation, but at all times, as may be known by our
being always able to find some specimens with air-bladders at the top
of the water in which they live."

If what has been already advanced has failed to convince the reader
of the hopelessness of attempting to explain instinct as a mode of
conscious deliberation, he must admit that the following
considerations are conclusive.  It is most certain that deliberation
and conscious reflection can only take account of such data as are
consciously perceived; if, then, it can be shown that data absolutely
indispensable for the arrival at a just conclusion cannot by any
possibility have been known consciously, the result can no longer be
held as having had its source in conscious deliberation.  It is
admitted that the only way in which consciousness can arrive at a
knowledge of exterior facts is by way of an impression made upon the
senses.  We must, therefore, prove that a knowledge of the facts
indispensable for arrival at a just conclusion could not have been
thus acquired.  This may be done as follows:  {111} for, Firstly, the
facts in question lie in the future, and the present gives no ground
for conjecturing the time and manner of their subsequent development.

Secondly, they are manifestly debarred from the category of
perceptions perceived through the senses, inasmuch as no information
can be derived concerning them except through experience of similar
occurrences in time past, and such experience is plainly out of the
question.

It would not affect the argument if, as I think likely, it were to
turn out, with the advance of our physiological knowledge, that all
the examples of the first case that I am about to adduce reduce
themselves to examples of the second, as must be admitted to have
already happened in respect of many that I have adduced hitherto.
For it is hardly more difficult to conceive of a priori knowledge,
disconnected from any impression made upon the senses, than of
knowledge which, it is true, does at the present day manifest itself
upon the occasion of certain general perceptions, but which can only
be supposed to be connected with these by means of such a chain of
inferences and judiciously applied knowledge as cannot be believed to
exist when we have regard to the capacity and organisation of the
animal we may be considering.

An example of the first case is supplied by the larva of the stag-
beetle in its endeavour to make itself a convenient hole in which to
become a chrysalis.  The female larva digs a hole exactly her own
size, but the male makes one as long again as himself, so as to allow
for the growth of his horns, which will be about the same length as
his body.  A knowledge of this circumstance is indispensable if the
result achieved is to be considered as due to reflection, yet the
actual present of the larva affords it no ground for conjecturing
beforehand the condition in which it will presently find itself.

As regards the second case, ferrets and buzzards fall forthwith upon
blind worms or other non-poisonous snakes, and devour them then and
there.  But they exhibit the greatest caution in laying hold of
adders, even though they have never before seen one, and will
endeavour first to bruise their heads, so as to avoid being bitten.
As there is nothing in any other respect alarming in the adder, a
conscious knowledge of the danger of its bite is indispensable, if
the conduct above described is to be referred to conscious
deliberation.  But this could only have been acquired through
experience, and the possibility of such experience may be controlled
in the case of animals that have been kept in captivity from their
youth up, so that the knowledge displayed can be ascertained to be
independent of experience.  On the other hand, both the above
illustrations afford evidence of an unconscious perception of the
facts, and prove the existence of a direct knowledge underivable from
any sensual impression or from consciousness.

This has always been recognised, {113} and has been described under
the words "presentiment" or "foreboding."  These words, however,
refer, on the one hand, only to an unknowable in the future,
separated from us by space, and not to one that is actually present;
on the other hand, they denote only the faint, dull, indefinite echo
returned by consciousness to an invariably distinct state of
unconscious knowledge.  Hence the word "presentiment," which carries
with it an idea of faintness and indistinctness, while, however, it
may be easily seen that sentiment destitute of all, even unconscious,
ideas can have no influence upon the result, for knowledge can only
follow upon an idea.  A presentiment that sounds in consonance with
our consciousness can indeed, under certain circumstances, become
tolerably definite, so that in the case of man it can be expressed in
thought and language; but experience teaches us that even among
ourselves this is not so when instincts special to the human race
come into play; we see rather that the echo of our unconscious
knowledge which finds its way into our consciousness is so weak that
it manifests itself only in the accompanying feelings or frame of
mind, and represents but an infinitely small fraction of the sum of
our sensations.  It is obvious that such a faintly sympathetic
consciousness cannot form a sufficient foundation for a
superstructure of conscious deliberation; on the other hand,
conscious deliberation would be unnecessary, inasmuch as the process
of thinking must have been already gone through unconsciously, for
every faint presentiment that obtrudes itself upon our consciousness
is in fact only the consequence of a distinct unconscious knowledge,
and the knowledge with which it is concerned is almost always an idea
of the purpose of some instinctive action, or of one most intimately
connected therewith.  Thus, in the case of the stag-beetle, the
purpose consists in the leaving space for the growth of the horns;
the means, in the digging the hole of a sufficient size; and the
unconscious knowledge, in prescience concerning the future
development of the horns.

Lastly, all instinctive actions give us an impression of absolute
security and infallibility.  With instinct the will is never
hesitating or weak, as it is when inferences are being drawn
consciously.  We never find instinct making mistakes; we cannot,
therefore, ascribe a result which is so invariably precise to such an
obscure condition of mind as is implied when the word presentiment is
used; on the contrary, this absolute certainty is so characteristic a
feature of instinctive actions, that it constitutes almost the only
well-marked point of distinction between these and actions that are
done upon reflection.  But from this it must again follow that some
principle lies at the root of instinct other than that which
underlies reflective action, and this can only be looked for in a
determination of the will through a process that lies in the
unconscious, {115a} to which this character of unhesitating
infallibility will attach itself in all our future investigations.

Many will be surprised at my ascribing to instinct an unconscious
knowledge, arising out of no sensual impression, and yet invariably
accurate.  This, however, is not a consequence of my theory
concerning instinct; it is the foundation on which that theory is
based, and is forced upon us by facts.  I must therefore adduce
examples.  And to give a name to the unconscious knowledge, which is
not acquired through impression made upon the senses, but which will
be found to be in our possession, though attained without the
instrumentality of means, {115b} I prefer the word "clairvoyance"
{115c} to "presentiment," which, for reasons already given, will not
serve me.  This word, therefore, will be here employed throughout, as
above defined.

Let us now consider examples of the instincts of self-preservation,
subsistence, migration, and the continuation of the species.  Most
animals know their natural enemies prior to experience of any hostile
designs upon themselves.  A flight of young pigeons, even though they
have no old birds with them, will become shy, and will separate from
one another on the approach of a bird of prey.  Horses and cattle
that come from countries where there are no lions become unquiet and
display alarm as soon as they are aware that a lion is approaching
them in the night.  Horses going along a bridle-path that used to
leave the town at the back of the old dens of the carnivora in the
Berlin Zoological Gardens were often terrified by the propinquity of
enemies who were entirely unknown to them.  Sticklebacks will swim
composedly among a number of voracious pike, knowing, as they do,
that the pike will not touch them.  For if a pike once by mistake
swallows a stickleback, the stickleback will stick in its throat by
reason of the spine it carries upon its back, and the pike must
starve to death without being able to transmit his painful experience
to his descendants.  In some countries there are people who by choice
eat dog's flesh; dogs are invariably savage in the presence of these
persons, as recognising in them enemies at whose hands they may one
day come to harm.  This is the more wonderful inasmuch as dog's fat
applied externally (as when rubbed upon boots) attracts dogs by its
smell.  Grant saw a young chimpanzee throw itself into convulsions of
terror at the sight of a large snake; and even among ourselves a
Gretchen can often detect a Mephistopheles.  An insect of the genius
bombyx will seize another of the genus parnopaea, and kill it
wherever it finds it, without making any subsequent use of the body;
but we know that the last-named insect lies in wait for the eggs of
the first, and is therefore the natural enemy of its race.  The
phenomenon known to stockdrivers and shepherds as "das Biesen des
Viehes" affords another example.  For when a "dassel" or "bies" fly
draws near the herd, the cattle become unmanageable and run about
among one another as though they were mad, knowing, as they do, that
the larvae from the eggs which the fly will lay upon them will
presently pierce their hides and occasion them painful sores.  These
"dassel" flies--which have no sting--closely resemble another kind of
gadfly which has a sting.  Nevertheless, this last kind is little
feared by cattle, while the first is so to an inordinate extent.  The
laying of the eggs upon the skin is at the time quite painless, and
no ill consequences follow until long afterwards, so that we cannot
suppose the cattle to draw a conscious inference concerning the
connection that exists between the two.  I have already spoken of the
foresight shown by ferrets and buzzards in respect of adders; in like
manner a young honey-buzzard, on being shown a wasp for the first
time, immediately devoured it after having squeezed the sting from
its body.  No animal, whose instinct has not been vitiated by
unnatural habits, will eat poisonous plants.  Even when apes have
contracted bad habits through their having been brought into contact
with mankind, they can still be trusted to show us whether certain
fruits found in their native forests are poisonous or no; for if
poisonous fruits are offered them they will refuse them with loud
cries.  Every animal will choose for its sustenance exactly those
animal or vegetable substances which agree best with its digestive
organs, without having received any instruction on the matter, and
without testing them beforehand.  Even, indeed, though we assume that
the power of distinguishing the different kinds of food is due to
sight and not to smell, it remains none the less mysterious how the
animal can know what it is that will agree with it.  Thus the kid
which Galen took prematurely from its mother smelt at all the
different kinds of food that were set before it, but drank only the
milk without touching anything else.  The cherry-finch opens a
cherry-stone by turning it so that her beak can hit the part where
the two sides join, and does this as much with the first stone she
cracks as with the last.  Fitchets, martens, and weasels make small
holes on the opposite sides of an egg which they are about to suck,
so that the air may come in while they are sucking.  Not only do
animals know the food that will suit them best, but they find out the
most suitable remedies when they are ill, and constantly form a
correct diagnosis of their malady with a therapeutical knowledge
which they cannot possibly have acquired.  Dogs will often eat a
great quantity of grass--particularly couch-grass--when they are
unwell, especially after spring, if they have worms, which thus pass
from them entangled in the grass, or if they want to get fragments of
bone from out of their stomachs.  As a purgative they make use of
plants that sting.  Hens and pigeons pick lime from walls and
pavements if their food does not afford them lime enough to make
their eggshells with.  Little children eat chalk when suffering from
acidity of the stomach, and pieces of charcoal if they are troubled
with flatulence.  We may observe these same instincts for certain
kinds of food or drugs even among grown-up people, under
circumstances in which their unconscious nature has unusual power;
as, for example, among women when they are pregnant, whose capricious
appetites are probably due to some special condition of the foetus,
which renders a certain state of the blood desirable.  Field-mice
bite off the germs of the corn which they collect together, in order
to prevent its growing during the winter.  Some days before the
beginning of cold weather the squirrel is most assiduous in
augmenting its store, and then closes its dwelling.  Birds of passage
betake themselves to warmer countries at times when there is still no
scarcity of food for them here, and when the temperature is
considerably warmer than it will be when they return to us.  The same
holds good of the time when animals begin to prepare their winter
quarters, which beetles constantly do during the very hottest days of
autumn.  When swallows and storks find their way back to their native
places over distances of hundreds of miles, and though the aspect of
the country is reversed, we say that this is due to the acuteness of
their perception of locality; but the same cannot be said of dogs,
which, though they have been carried in a bag from one place to
another that they do not know, and have been turned round and round
twenty times over, have still been known to find their way home.
Here we can say no more than that their instinct has conducted them--
that the clairvoyance of the unconscious has allowed them to
conjecture their way. {119a}

Before an early winter, birds of passage collect themselves in
preparation for their flight sooner than usual; but when the winter
is going to be mild, they will either not migrate at all, or travel
only a small distance southward.  When a hard winter is coming,
tortoises will make their burrows deeper.  If wild geese, cranes,
etc., soon return from the countries to which they had betaken
themselves at the beginning of spring, it is a sign that a hot and
dry summer is about to ensue in those countries, and that the drought
will prevent their being able to rear their young.  In years of
flood, beavers construct their dwellings at a higher level than
usual, and shortly before an inundation the field-mice in Kamtschatka
come out of their holes in large bands.  If the summer is going to be
dry, spiders may be seen in May and April, hanging from the ends of
threads several feet in length.  If in winter spiders are seen
running about much, fighting with one another and preparing new webs,
there will be cold weather within the next nine days, or from that to
twelve:  when they again hide themselves there will be a thaw.  I
have no doubt that much of this power of prophesying the weather is
due to a perception of certain atmospheric conditions which escape
ourselves, but this perception can only have relation to a certain
actual and now present condition of the weather; and what can the
impression made by this have to do with their idea of the weather
that will ensue?  No one will ascribe to animals a power of
prognosticating the weather months beforehand by means of inferences
drawn logically from a series of observations, {119b} to the extent
of being able to foretell floods.  It is far more probable that the
power of perceiving subtle differences of actual atmospheric
condition is nothing more than the sensual perception which acts as
motive--for a motive must assuredly be always present--when an
instinct comes into operation.  It continues to hold good, therefore,
that the power of foreseeing the weather is a case of unconscious
clairvoyance, of which the stork which takes its departure for the
south four weeks earlier than usual knows no more than does the stag
when before a cold winter he grows himself a thicker pelt than is his
wont.  On the one hand, animals have present in their consciousness a
perception of the actual state of the weather; on the other, their
ensuing action is precisely such as it would be if the idea present
with them was that of the weather that is about to come.  This they
cannot consciously have; the only natural intermediate link,
therefore, between their conscious knowledge and their action is
supplied by unconscious idea, which, however, is always accurately
prescient, inasmuch as it contains something which is neither given
directly to the animal through sensual perception, nor can be deduced
inferentially through the understanding.

Most wonderful of all are the instincts connected with the
continuation of the species.  The males always find out the females
of their own kind, but certainly not solely through their resemblance
to themselves.  With many animals, as, for example, parasitic crabs,
the sexes so little resemble one another that the male would be more
likely to seek a mate from the females of a thousand other species
than from his own.  Certain butterflies are polymorphic, and not only
do the males and females of the same species differ, but the females
present two distinct forms, one of which as a general rule mimics the
outward appearance of a distant but highly valued species; yet the
males will pair only with the females of their own kind, and not with
the strangers, though these may be very likely much more like the
males themselves.  Among the insect species of the strepsiptera, the
female is a shapeless worm which lives its whole life long in the
hind body of a wasp; its head, which is of the shape of a lentil,
protrudes between two of the belly rings of the wasp, the rest of the
body being inside.  The male, which only lives for a few hours, and
resembles a moth, nevertheless recognises his mate in spite of these
adverse circumstances, and fecundates her.

Before any experience of parturition, the knowledge that it is
approaching drives all mammals into solitude, and bids them prepare a
nest for their young in a hole or in some other place of shelter.
The bird builds her nest as soon as she feels the eggs coming to
maturity within her.  Snails, land-crabs, tree-frogs, and toads, all
of them ordinarily dwellers upon land, now betake themselves to the
water; sea-tortoises go on shore, and many saltwater fishes come up
into the rivers in order to lay their eggs where they can alone find
the requisites for their development.  Insects lay their eggs in the
most varied kinds of situations,--in sand, on leaves, under the hides
and horny substances of other animals; they often select the spot
where the larva will be able most readily to find its future
sustenance, as in autumn upon the trees that will open first in the
coming spring, or in spring upon the blossoms that will first bear
fruit in autumn, or in the insides of those caterpillars which will
soonest as chrysalides provide the parasitic larva at once with food
and with protection.  Other insects select the sites from which they
will first get forwarded to the destination best adapted for their
development.  Thus some horseflies lay their eggs upon the lips of
horses or upon parts where they are accustomed to lick themselves.
The eggs get conveyed hence into the entrails, the proper place for
their development,--and are excreted upon their arrival at maturity.
The flies that infest cattle know so well how to select the most
vigorous and healthiest beasts, that cattle-dealers and tanners place
entire dependence upon them, and prefer those beasts and hides that
are most scarred by maggots.  This selection of the best cattle by
the help of these flies is no evidence in support of the conclusion
that the flies possess the power of making experiments consciously
and of reflecting thereupon, even though the men whose trade it is to
do this recognise them as their masters.  The solitary wasp makes a
hole several inches deep in the sand, lays her egg, and packs along
with it a number of green maggots that have no legs, and which, being
on the point of becoming chrysalides, are well nourished and able to
go a long time without food; she packs these maggots so closely
together that they cannot move nor turn into chrysalides, and just
enough of them to support the larva until it becomes a chrysalis.  A
kind of bug (cerceris bupresticida), which itself lives only upon
pollen, lays her eggs in an underground cell, and with each one of
them she deposits three beetles, which she has lain in wait for and
captured when they were still weak through having only just left off
being chrysalides.  She kills these beetles, and appears to smear
them with a fluid whereby she preserves them fresh and suitable for
food.  Many kinds of wasps open the cells in which their larvae are
confined when these must have consumed the provision that was left
with them.  They supply them with more food, and again close the
cell.  Ants, again, hit always upon exactly the right moment for
opening the cocoons in which their larvae are confined and for
setting them free, the larva being unable to do this for itself.  Yet
the life of only a few kinds of insects lasts longer than a single
breeding season.  What then can they know about the contents of their
eggs and the fittest place for their development?  What can they know
about the kind of food the larva will want when it leaves the egg--a
food so different from their own?  What, again, can they know about
the quantity of food that will be necessary?  How much of all this at
least can they know consciously?  Yet their actions, the pains they
take, and the importance they evidently attach to these matters,
prove that they have a foreknowledge of the future:  this knowledge
therefore can only be an unconscious clairvoyance.  For clairvoyance
it must certainly be that inspires the will of an animal to open
cells and cocoons at the very moment that the larva is either ready
for more food or fit for leaving the cocoon.  The eggs of the cuckoo
do not take only from two to three days to mature in her ovaries, as
those of most birds do, but require from eleven to twelve; the
cuckoo, therefore, cannot sit upon her own eggs, for her first egg
would be spoiled before the last was laid.  She therefore lays in
other birds' nests--of course laying each egg in a different nest.
But in order that the birds may not perceive her egg to be a stranger
and turn it out of the nest, not only does she lay an egg much
smaller than might be expected from a bird of her size (for she only
finds her opportunity among small birds), but, as already said, she
imitates the other eggs in the nest she has selected with surprising
accuracy in respect both of colour and marking.  As the cuckoo
chooses the nest some days beforehand, it may be thought, if the nest
is an open one, that the cuckoo looks upon the colour of the eggs
within it while her own is in process of maturing inside her, and
that it is thus her egg comes to assume the colour of the others; but
this explanation will not hold good for nests that are made in the
holes of trees, as that of sylvia phaenicurus, or which are oven-
shaped with a narrow entrance, as with sylvia rufa.  In these cases
the cuckoo can neither slip in nor look in, and must therefore lay
her egg outside the nest and push it inside with her beak; she can
therefore have no means of perceiving through her senses what the
eggs already in the nest are like.  If, then, in spite of all this,
her egg closely resembles the others, this can only have come about
through an unconscious clairvoyance which directs the process that
goes on within the ovary in respect of colour and marking.

An important argument in support of the existence of a clairvoyance
in the instincts of animals is to be found in the series of facts
which testify to the existence of a like clairvoyance, under certain
circumstances, even among human beings, while the self-curative
instincts of children and of pregnant women have been already
mentioned.  Here, however, {124} in correspondence with the higher
stage of development which human consciousness has attained, a
stronger echo of the unconscious clairvoyance commonly resounds
within consciousness itself, and this is represented by a more or
less definite presentiment of the consequences that will ensue.  It
is also in accord with the greater independence of the human
intellect that this kind of presentiment is not felt exclusively
immediately before the carrying out of an action, but is occasionally
disconnected from the condition that an action has to be performed
immediately, and displays itself simply as an idea independently of
conscious will, provided only that the matter concerning which the
presentiment is felt is one which in a high degree concerns the will
of the person who feels it.  In the intervals of an intermittent
fever or of other illness, it not unfrequently happens that sick
persons can accurately foretell the day of an approaching attack and
how long it will last.  The same thing occurs almost invariably in
the case of spontaneous, and generally in that of artificial,
somnambulism; certainly the Pythia, as is well known, used to
announce the date of her next ecstatic state.  In like manner the
curative instinct displays itself in somnambulists, and they have
been known to select remedies that have been no less remarkable for
the success attending their employment than for the completeness with
which they have run counter to received professional opinion.  The
indication of medicinal remedies is the only use which respectable
electro-biologists will make of the half-sleeping, half-waking
condition of those whom they are influencing.  "People in perfectly
sound health have been known, before childbirth or at the
commencement of an illness, to predict accurately their own
approaching death.  The accomplishment of their predictions can
hardly be explained as the result of mere chance, for if this were
all, the prophecy should fail at least as often as not, whereas the
reverse is actually the case.  Many of these persons neither desire
death nor fear it, so that the result cannot be ascribed to
imagination."  So writes the celebrated physiologist, Burdach, from
whose chapter on presentiment in his work "Bhicke in's Leben" a great
part of my most striking examples is taken.  This presentiment of
deaths, which is the exception among men, is quite common with
animals, even though they do not know nor understand what death is.
When they become aware that their end is approaching, they steal away
to outlying and solitary places.  This is why in cities we so rarely
see the dead body or skeleton of a cat.  We can only suppose that the
unconscious clairvoyance, which is of essentially the same kind
whether in man or beast, calls forth presentiments of different
degrees of definiteness, so that the cat is driven to withdraw
herself through a mere instinct without knowing why she does so,
while in man a definite perception is awakened of the fact that he is
about to die.  Not only do people have presentiments concerning their
own death, but there are many instances on record in which they have
become aware of that of those near and dear to them, the dying person
having appeared in a dream to friend or wife or husband.  Stories to
this effect prevail among all nations, and unquestionably contain
much truth.  Closely connected with this is the power of second
sight, which existed formerly in Scotland, and still does so in the
Danish islands.  This power enables certain people without any
ecstasy, but simply through their keener perception, to foresee
coming events, or to tell what is going on in foreign countries on
matters in which they are deeply interested, such as deaths, battles,
conflagrations (Swedenborg foretold the burning of Stockholm), the
arrival or the doings of friends who are at a distance.  With many
persons this clairvoyance is confined to a knowledge of the death of
their acquaintances or fellow-townspeople.  There have been a great
many instances of such death-prophetesses, and, what is most
important, some cases have been verified in courts of law.  I may
say, in passing, that this power of second sight is found in persons
who are in ecstatic states, in the spontaneous or artificially
induced somnambulism of the higher kinds of waking dreams, as well as
in lucid moments before death.  These prophetic glimpses, by which
the clairvoyance of the unconscious reveals itself to consciousness,
{126} are commonly obscure because in the brain they must assume a
form perceptible by the senses, whereas the unconscious idea can have
nothing to do with any form of sensual impression:  it is for this
reason that humours, dreams, and the hallucinations of sick persons
can so easily have a false signification attached to them.  The
chances of error and self-deception that arise from this source, the
ease with which people may be deceived intentionally, and the
mischief which, as a general rule, attends a knowledge of the future,
these considerations place beyond all doubt the practical unwisdom of
attempts to arrive at certainty concerning the future.  This,
however, cannot affect the weight which in theory should be attached
to phenomena of this kind, and must not prevent us from recognising
the positive existence of the clairvoyance whose existence I am
maintaining, though it is often hidden under a chaos of madness and
imposture.

The materialistic and rationalistic tendencies of the present day
lead most people either to deny facts of this kind in toto, or to
ignore them, inasmuch as they are inexplicable from a materialistic
standpoint, and cannot be established by the inductive or
experimental method--as though this last were not equally impossible
in the case of morals, social science, and politics.  A mind of any
candour will only be able to deny the truths of this entire class of
phenomena so long as it remains in ignorance of the facts that have
been related concerning them; but, again, a continuance in this
ignorance can only arise from unwillingness to be convinced.  I am
satisfied that many of those who deny all human power of divination
would come to another, and, to say the least, more cautious
conclusion if they would be at the pains of further investigation;
and I hold that no one, even at the present day, need be ashamed of
joining in with an opinion which was maintained by all the great
spirits of antiquity except Epicurus--an opinion whose possible truth
hardly one of our best modern philosophers has ventured to
contravene, and which the champions of German enlightenment were so
little disposed to relegate to the domain of old wives' tales, that
Goethe furnishes us with an example of second sight that fell within
his own experience, and confirms it down to its minutest details.

Although I am far from believing that the kind of phenomena above
referred to form in themselves a proper foundation for a
superstructure of scientific demonstration, I nevertheless find them
valuable as a completion and further confirmation of the series of
phenomena presented to us by the clairvoyance which we observe in
human and animal instinct.  Even though they only continue this
series {128} through the echo that is awakened within our
consciousness, they as powerfully support the account which
instinctive actions give concerning their own nature, as they are
themselves supported by the analogy they present to the clairvoyance
observable in instinct.  This, then, as well as my desire not to lose
an opportunity of protesting against a modern prejudice, must stand
as my reason for having allowed myself to refer, in a scientific
work, to a class of phenomena which has fallen at present into so
much discredit.

I will conclude with a few words upon a special kind of instinct
which has a very instructive bearing upon the subject generally, and
shows how impossible it is to evade the supposition of an unconscious
clairvoyance on the part of instinct.  In the examples adduced
hitherto, the action of each individual has been done on the
individual's own behalf, except in the case of instincts connected
with the continuation of the species, where the action benefits
others--that is to say, the offspring of the creature performing it.

We must now examine the cases in which a solidarity of instinct is
found to exist between several individuals, so that, on the one hand,
the action of each redounds to the common welfare, and, on the other,
it becomes possible for a useful purpose to be achieved through the
harmonious association of individual workers.  This community of
instinct exists also among the higher animals, but here it is harder
to distinguish from associations originating through conscious will,
inasmuch as speech supplies the means of a more perfect
intercommunication of aim and plan.  We shall, however, definitely
recognise {129} this general effect of a universal instinct in the
origin of speech and in the great political and social movements in
the history of the world.  Here we are concerned only with the
simplest and most definite examples that can be found anywhere, and
therefore we will deal in preference with the lower animals, among
which, in the absence of voice, the means of communicating thought,
mimicry, and physiognomy, are so imperfect that the harmony and
interconnection of the individual actions cannot in its main points
be ascribed to an understanding arrived at through speech.  Huber
observed that when a new comb was being constructed a number of the
largest working-bees, that were full of honey, took no part in the
ordinary business of the others, but remained perfectly aloof.
Twenty-four hours afterwards small plates of wax had formed under
their bellies.  The bee drew these off with her hind-feet, masticated
them, and made them into a band.  The small plates of wax thus
prepared were then glued to the roof of the hive one on the top of
the other.  When one of the bees of this kind had used up her plates
of wax, another followed her and carried the same work forward in the
same way.  A thin rough vertical wall, half a line in thickness and
fastened to the sides of the hive, was thus constructed.  On this,
one of the smaller working-bees whose belly was empty came, and after
surveying the wall, made a flat half-oval excavation in the middle of
one of its sides; she piled up the wax thus excavated round the edge
of the excavation.  After a short time she was relieved by another
like herself, till more than twenty followed one another in this way.
Meanwhile another bee began to make a similar hollow on the other
side of the wall, but corresponding only with the rim of the
excavation on this side.  Presently another bee began a second hollow
upon the same side, each bee being continually relieved by others.
Other bees kept coming up and bringing under their bellies plates of
wax, with which they heightened the edge of the small wall of wax.
In this, new bees were constantly excavating the ground for more
cells, while others proceeded by degrees to bring those already begun
into a perfectly symmetrical shape, and at the same time continued
building up the prismatic walls between them.  Thus the bees worked
on opposite sides of the wall of wax, always on the same plan and in
the closest correspondence with those upon the other side, until
eventually the cells on both sides were completed in all their
wonderful regularity and harmony of arrangement, not merely as
regards those standing side by side, but also as regards those which
were upon the other side of their pyramidal base.

Let the reader consider how animals that are accustomed to confer
together, by speech or otherwise, concerning designs which they may
be pursuing in common, will wrangle with thousandfold diversity of
opinion; let him reflect how often something has to be undone,
destroyed, and done over again; how at one time too many hands come
forward, and at another too few; what running to and fro there is
before each has found his right place; how often too many, and again
too few, present themselves for a relief gang; and how we find all
this in the concerted works of men, who stand so far higher than bees
in the scale of organisation.  We see nothing of the kind among bees.
A survey of their operations leaves rather the impression upon us as
though an invisible master-builder had prearranged a scheme of action
for the entire community, and had impressed it upon each individual
member, as though each class of workers had learnt their appointed
work by heart, knew their places and the numbers in which they should
relieve each other, and were informed instantaneously by a secret
signal of the moment when their action was wanted.  This, however, is
exactly the manner in which an instinct works; and as the intention
of the entire community is instinctively present in the unconscious
clairvoyance {131a} of each individual bee, so the possession of this
common instinct impels each one of them to the discharge of her
special duties when the right moment has arrived.  It is only thus
that the wonderful tranquillity and order which we observe could be
attained.  What we are to think concerning this common instinct must
be reserved for explanation later on, but the possibility of its
existence is already evident, inasmuch {131b} as each individual has
an unconscious insight concerning the plan proposed to itself by the
community, and also concerning the means immediately to be adopted
through concerted action--of which, however, only the part requiring
his own co-operation is present in the consciousness of each.  Thus,
for example, the larva of the bee itself spins the silky chamber in
which it is to become a chrysalis, but other bees must close it with
its lid of wax.  The purpose of there being a chamber in which the
larva can become a chrysalis must be present in the minds of each of
these two parties to the transaction, but neither of them acts under
the influence of conscious will, except in regard to his own
particular department.  I have already mentioned the fact that the
larva, after its metamorphosis, must be freed from its cell by other
bees, and have told how the working-bees in autumn kill the drones,
so that they may not have to feed a number of useless mouths
throughout the winter, and how they only spare them when they are
wanted in order to fecundate a new queen.  Furthermore, the working-
bees build cells in which the eggs laid by the queen may come to
maturity, and, as a general rule, make just as many chambers as the
queen lays eggs; they make these, moreover, in the same order as that
in which the queen lays her eggs, namely, first for the working-bees,
then for the drones, and lastly for the queens.  In the polity of the
bees, the working and the sexual capacities, which were once united,
are now personified in three distinct kinds of individual, and these
combine with an inner, unconscious, spiritual union, so as to form a
single body politic, as the organs of a living body combine to form
the body itself.

In this chapter, therefore, we have arrived at the following
conclusions:-

Instinct is not the result of conscious deliberation; {132} it is not
a consequence of bodily organisation; it is not a mere result of a
mechanism which lies in the organisation of the brain; it is not the
operation of dead mechanism, glued on, as it were, to the soul, and
foreign to its inmost essence; but it is the spontaneous action of
the individual, springing from his most essential nature and
character.  The purpose to which any particular kind of instinctive
action is subservient is not the purpose of a soul standing outside
the individual and near akin to Providence--a purpose once for all
thought out, and now become a matter of necessity to the individual,
so that he can act in no other way, though it is engrafted into his
nature from without, and not natural to it.  The purpose of the
instinct is in each individual case thought out and willed
unconsciously by the individual, and afterwards the choice of means
adapted to each particular case is arrived at unconsciously.  A
knowledge of the purpose is often absolutely unattainable {133} by
conscious knowledge through sensual perception.  Then does the
peculiarity of the unconscious display itself in the clairvoyance of
which consciousness perceives partly only a faint and dull, and
partly, as in the case of man, a more or less definite echo by way of
sentiment, whereas the instinctive action itself--the carrying out of
the means necessary for the achievement of the unconscious purpose--
falls always more clearly within consciousness, inasmuch as due
performance of what is necessary would be otherwise impossible.
Finally, the clairvoyance makes itself perceived in the concerted
action of several individuals combining to carry out a common but
unconscious purpose.

Up to this point we have encountered clairvoyance as a fact which we
observe but cannot explain, and the reader may say that he prefers to
take his stand here, and be content with regarding instinct simply as
a matter of fact, the explanation of which is at present beyond our
reach.  Against this it must be urged, firstly, that clairvoyance is
not confined to instinct, but is found also in man; secondly, that
clairvoyance is by no means present in all instincts, and that
therefore our experience shows us clairvoyance and instinct as two
distinct things--clairvoyance being of great use in explaining
instinct, but instinct serving nothing to explain clairvoyance;
thirdly and lastly, that the clairvoyance of the individual will not
continue to be so incomprehensible to us, but will be perfectly well
explained in the further course of our investigation, while we must
give up all hope of explaining instinct in any other way.

The conception we have thus arrived at enables us to regard instinct
as the innermost kernel, so to speak, of every living being.  That
this is actually the case is shown by the instincts of self-
preservation and of the continuation of the species which we observe
throughout creation, and by the heroic self-abandonment with which
the individual will sacrifice welfare, and even life, at the bidding
of instinct.  We see this when we think of the caterpillar, and how
she repairs her cocoon until she yields to exhaustion; of the bird,
and how she will lay herself to death; of the disquiet and grief
displayed by all migratory animals if they are prevented from
migrating.  A captive cuckoo will always die at the approach of
winter through despair at being unable to fly away; so will the
vineyard snail if it is hindered of its winter sleep.  The weakest
mother will encounter an enemy far surpassing her in strength, and
suffer death cheerfully for her offspring's sake.  Every year we see
fresh cases of people who have been unfortunate going mad or
committing suicide.  Women who have survived the Caesarian operation
allow themselves so little to be deterred from further childbearing
through fear of this frightful and generally fatal operation, that
they will undergo it no less than three times.  Can we suppose that
what so closely resembles demoniacal possession can have come about
through something engrafted on to the soul as a mechanism foreign to
its inner nature, {135} or through conscious deliberation which
adheres always to a bare egoism, and is utterly incapable of such
self-sacrifice for the sake of offspring as is displayed by the
procreative and maternal instincts?

We have now, finally, to consider how it arises that the instincts of
any animal species are so similar within the limits of that species--
a circumstance which has not a little contributed to the engrafted-
mechanism theory.  But it is plain that like causes will be followed
by like effects; and this should afford sufficient explanation.  The
bodily mechanism, for example, of all the individuals of a species is
alike; so again are their capabilities and the outcomes of their
conscious intelligence--though this, indeed, is not the case with
man, nor in some measure even with the highest animals; and it is
through this want of uniformity that there is such a thing as
individuality.  The external conditions of all the individuals of a
species are also tolerably similar, and when they differ essentially,
the instincts are likewise different--a fact in support of which no
examples are necessary.  From like conditions of mind and body (and
this includes like predispositions of brain and ganglia) and like
exterior circumstances, like desires will follow as a necessary
logical consequence.  Again, from like desires and like inward and
outward circumstances, a like choice of means--that is to say, like
instincts--must ensue.  These last two steps would not be conceded
without restriction if the question were one involving conscious
deliberation, but as these logical consequences are supposed to
follow from the unconscious, which takes the right step unfailingly
without vacillation or delay so long as the premises are similar, the
ensuing desires and the instincts to adopt the means for their
gratification will be similar also.

Thus the view which we have taken concerning instinct explains the
very last point which it may be thought worth while to bring forward
in support of the opinions of our opponents.

I will conclude this chapter with the words of Schelling:
"Thoughtful minds will hold the phenomena of animal instinct to
belong to the most important of all phenomena, and to be the true
touchstone of a durable philosophy."


