
CHAPTER VI

THE FALLACY OF MOST MEMORY SYSTEMS


[Sidenote: _Practice in Memorizing Inadequate_]

It is evident that if what we have been describing as the process of
recall is true, then the commonly accepted idea that _practice_ in
memorizing makes memorizing _easier_ is false, and that there is no
truth in the popular figure of speech that likens the memory to a muscle
that grows stronger with use.

So far as the memory is concerned, however, practice may result in a
more or less unconscious improvement in the _methods_ of memorizing.

_By practice we come to unconsciously discover and employ new
associative methods in our recording of facts, making them easier to
recall, but we can certainly add nothing to the actual scope and power
of retention._

[Sidenote: _Torture of the Drill_]

Yet many books on memory-training have wide circulation whose authors,
showing no conception of the processes involved, seek to develop the
general ability to remember by incessant practice in memorizing
particular facts, just as one would develop a muscle by exercise.

The following is quoted from a well-known work of this character:

"I am now treating a case of loss of memory in a person advanced in
years, who did not know that his memory had failed most remarkably
until I told him of it. He is making vigorous efforts to bring it back
again, and with partial success. The method pursued is to spend two
hours daily, one in the morning and one in the evening, in exercising
this faculty. The patient is instructed to give the closest attention to
all that he learns, so that it shall be impressed on his mind clearly.
He is asked to recall every evening all the facts and experiences of the
day, and again the next morning. Every name heard is written down and
impressed on his mind clearly and an effort made to recall it at
intervals. Ten names from among public men are ordered to be committed
to memory every week. A verse of poetry is to be learned, also a verse
from the Bible, daily. He is asked to remember the number of the page of
any book where any interesting fact is recorded. These and _other_
methods are slowly resuscitating a failing memory."

[Sidenote: _Real Cause of Failing Memory_]

As remarked by Professor James, "It is hard to believe that the memory
of the poor old gentleman is a bit the better for all this torture
except in respect to the particular facts thus wrought into it, the
occurrences attended to and repeated on those days, the names of those
politicians, those Bible verses, etc., etc."

The error in the book first quoted from lies in the fact that its author
looks upon a failing memory as indicating a loss of retentiveness. The
_real_ cause is the loss of an intensity of interest. _It is the failure
to form sufficiently large groups and complexes of related ideas,
emotions and muscular movements associated with the particular fact to
be remembered. There is no reason to believe that the retention of
sensory experiences is not at all times perfectly mechanical and
mechanically perfect._

Interest is a mental yearning. It is the offspring of desire and the
mother of memory.

It goes out spontaneously to anything that can add to the sum of one's
knowledge about the thing desired.

[Sidenote: _The Manufactured Interest_]

A manufactured interest is counterfeit. When a thing is done because it
has to be done, desire dies and "duty" is born. In proportion as a
subject is associated with "duty," it is divorced from interest.

[Sidenote: _Memory Lure of a Desire_]

If you want to impress anything on another man's mind so that he will
remember it, harness it up with the lure of a desire.

Diffused interest is the cause of all unprofitable forgetfulness. Do not
allow your attention to grope vaguely among a number of things. Whatever
you do, make a business of doing it with your whole soul. Turn the
spotlight of your mind upon it, and you will not forget it.

[Illustration: TESTING ABILITY TO OBSERVE, REMEMBER AND REPORT THINGS
SEEN PRIVATE LABORATORY, SOCIETY OF APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY]




A SCIENTIFIC MEMORY SYSTEM FOR BUSINESS SUCCESS

[Illustration: Decorative Header]

