
CHAPTER III.

On Amusements and Indulgences.


SECTION I. _On Gaming._

Even Voltaire asserts that 'every gambler is, has been, or will be a
robber.' Few practices are more ancient, few more general, and few, if
any, more pernicious than gaming. An English writer has ingeniously
suggested that the Devil himself might have been the first player, and
that he contrived the plan of introducing games among men, to afford
them temporary amusement, and divert their attention from themselves.
'What numberless disciples,' he adds, 'of his sable majesty, might we
not count in our own metropolis!'

Whether his satanic majesty has any very direct agency in this matter
or not, one thing is certain;--gaming is opposed to the happiness of
mankind, and ought, in every civilized country, to be suppressed by
public opinion. By gaming, however, I here refer to those cases only in
which property is at stake, to be won or lost. The subject of
_diversions_ will be considered in another place.

Gaming is an evil, because, in the first place, it is a practice which
_produces_ nothing. He who makes two blades of grass grow where but one
grew before, has usually been admitted to be a public benefactor; for
he is a _producer_. So is he who combines or arranges these productions
in a useful manner,--I mean the mechanic, manufacturer, &c. He is
equally a public benefactor, too, who produces _mental_ or _moral_
wealth, as well as physical. In gaming, it is true, property is shifted
from one individual to another, and here and there one probably gains
more than he loses; but nothing is actually _made_, or _produced_. If
the whole human family were all skilful gamesters, and should play
constantly for a year, there would not be a dollar more in the world at
the end of the year, than there was at its commencement. On the
contrary, is it not obvious that there would be much _less_, besides
even an immense loss of time?[9]

But, secondly, gaming favors corruption of manners. It is difficult to
trace the progress of the gamester's mind, from the time he commences
his downward course, but we know too well the goal at which he is
destined to arrive. There may be exceptions, but not many; generally
speaking, every gamester, sooner or later travels the road to
perdition, and often adds to his own wo, by dragging others along with
him.

Thirdly, it discourages industry. He who is accustomed to receive large
sums at once, which bear no sort of proportion to the labor by which
they are obtained, will gradually come to regard the moderate but
constant and certain rewards of industrious exertion as insipid. He is
also in danger of falling into the habit of paying an undue regard to
hazard or chance, and of becoming devoted to the doctrine of fatality.

As to the few who are skilful enough to gain more, on the whole, than
they lose, scarcely one of them pays any regard to prudence or economy
in his expenditures. What is thus lightly acquired, is lightly disposed
of. Or if, in one instance in a thousand, it happens otherwise, the
result is still unfavorable. It is but to make the miser still more a
miser, and the covetous only the more so. Man is so constituted as to
be unable to bear, with safety, a rapid accumulation of property. To
the truth of this, all history attests, whether ancient or modern,
sacred or profane.

The famous philosopher Locke, in his 'Thoughts on Education,' thus
observes: 'It is certain, gaming leaves no satisfaction behind it to
those who reflect when it is over; and it no way profits either body or
mind. As to their estates, if it strike so deep as to concern them, it
is a _trade_ then, and not a _recreation_, wherein few thrive; and at
best a thriving gamester has but a poor trade of it, who fills his
pockets at the price of his reputation.'

In regard to the _criminality_ of the practice, a late writer has the
following striking remarks.

'As to gaming, it is always _criminal_, either in itself or in its
tendency. The basis of it is covetousness; a desire to take from others
something for which you have neither given, nor intend to give an
equivalent. No gambler was ever yet a happy man, and few gamblers have
escaped being positively miserable. Remember, too, that to game for
_nothing_ is still _gaming_; and naturally leads to gaming for
_something_. It is sacrificing time, and that, too, for the worst of
purposes.

'I have kept house for nearly forty years; I have reared a family; I
have entertained as many friends as most people; and I never had cards,
dice, a chess board, nor any implement of gaming under my roof. The
hours that young men spend in this way, are hours murdered; precious
hours that ought to be spent either in reading or in writing; or in
rest; preparatory to the duties of the dawn.

'Though I do not agree with those base flatterers who declare the army
to be _the best school for statesmen_, it is certainly a school in
which we learn, experimentally, many useful lessons; and in this school
I learned that men fond of gaming, are rarely, if ever, trust-worthy. I
have known many a decent man rejected in the way of promotion, only
because he was addicted to gaming. Men, in that state of life, cannot
_ruin_ themselves by gaming, for they possess no fortune, nor money;
but the taste for gaming is always regarded as an indication of a
radically bad disposition; and I can truly say that I never in my whole
life--and it has been a long and eventful one--knew a man fond of
gaming, who was not, in some way or other, unworthy of confidence. This
vice creeps on by very slow degrees, till, at last, it becomes an
ungovernable passion, swallowing up every good and kind feeling of the
heart.'

For my own part I know not the _names_ of cards; and could never take
interest enough in card-playing to remember them. I have always
wondered how sober and intelligent people, who have consciences, and
believe the doctrine of accountability to God--how professing
Christians even, as is the case in some parts of this country, can sit
whole evenings at cards. Why, what notions have they of the value of
time? Can they conceive of Him, whose example we are bound to follow,
as engaged in this way? The thought should shock us! What a Herculean
task Christianity has yet to accomplish!

The excess of this vice has caused even the overthrow of empires. It
leads to conspiracies, and creates conspirators. Men overwhelmed with
debt, are always ready to obey the orders of any bold chieftain who may
attempt a decisive stroke, even against government itself. Catiline had
very soon under his command an army of scoundrels. 'Every man,' says
Sallust, 'who by his follies or losses at the gaming table had consumed
the inheritance of his fathers, and all who were sufferers by such
misery, were the friends of this perverse man.'

Perhaps this vice has nowhere been carried to greater excess than in
France. There it has its administration, its chief, its stockholders,
its officers, and its priests. It has its domestics, its pimps, its
spies, its informers, its assassins, its bullies, its aiders, its
abettors,--in fact, its scoundrels of every description; particularly
its hireling swindlers, who are paid for decoying the unwary into this
'hell upon earth,' so odious to morality, and so destructive to virtue
and Christianity.

In England, this vice has at all times been looked upon as one of
pernicious consequence to the commonwealth, and has, therefore, long
been prohibited. The money lost in this way, is even recoverable again
by law. Some of the laws on this subject were enacted as early as the
time of Queen Anne, and not a few of the penalties are very severe.
Every species of gambling is strictly forbidden in the British army,
and occasionally punished with great severity, by order of the
commander in chief. These facts show the state of public opinion in
that country, in regard to the evil tendency of this practice.

Men of immense wealth have, in some instances, entered gambling houses,
and in the short space of an hour have found themselves reduced to
absolute beggary. 'Such men often lose not only what their purses or
their bankers can supply, but houses, lands, equipage, jewels; in fine,
every thing of which they call themselves masters, even to their very
clothes; then perhaps a pistol terminates their mortal career.'

Fifteen hours a day are devoted by many infatuated persons in some
countries to this unhappy practice. In the middle of the day, while the
wife directs with prudence and economy the administration of her
husband's house, he abandons himself to become the prey of rapacious
midnight and _mid-day_ robbers. The result is, that he contracts debts,
is stripped of his property, and his wife and children are sent to the
alms-house, whilst he, perhaps, _perishes in a prison_.

My life has been chiefly spent in a situation where comparatively
little of this vice prevails. Yet, I have known one individual who
divided his time between hunting and gaming. About four days in the
week were regularly devoted to the latter practice. From breakfast to
dinner, from dinner to tea, from tea to nine o'clock, this was his
regular employment, and was pursued incessantly. The man was about
seventy years of age. He did not play for very large sums, it is true;
seldom more than five to twenty dollars; and it was his uniform
practice to retire precisely at nine o'clock, and without supper.

Generally, however, the night is more especially devoted to this
employment. I have occasionally been at public houses, or on board
vessels where a company was playing, and have known many hundreds of
dollars lost in a single night. In one instance, the most horrid
midnight oaths and blasphemy were indulged. Besides, there is an almost
direct connection between the gambling table and brothel; and the one
is seldom long unaccompanied by the other.

Scarcely less obvious and direct is the connection between this vice
and intemperance. If the drunkard is not always a gamester, the
gamester is almost without exception intemperate. There is for the most
part a union of the three--horrible as the alliance may be--I mean
gambling, intemperance, and debauchery.

There is even a species of intoxication attendant on gambling. _Rede_,
in speaking of one form of this vice which prevails in Europe, says;
'It is, in fact, a PROMPT MURDERER; irregular as all other games of
hazard--rapid as lightning in its movements--its strokes succeed each
other with an activity that redoubles the ardor of the player's blood,
and often deprives him of the advantage of reflection. In fact, a man
after half an hour's play, who for the whole night may not have taken
any thing stronger than water, has all the appearance of drunkenness.'
And who has not seen the flushed cheek and the red eye, produced simply
by the excitement of an ordinary gaming table?

It is an additional proof of the evil of gaming that every person
devoted to it, _feels_ it to be an evil. Why then does he not refrain?
Because he has sold himself a slave to the deadly habit, as effectually
as the drunkard to his cups.

Burgh, in his Dignity of Human Nature, sums up the evils of this
practice in a single paragraph:

'Gaming is an amusement wholly unworthy of rational beings, having
neither the pretence of exercising the body, of exerting ingenuity, or
of giving any natural pleasure, and owing its entertainment wholly to
an unnatural and vitiated taste;--the cause of infinite loss of time,
of enormous destruction of money, of irritating the passions, of
stirring up avarice, of innumerable sneaking tricks and frauds, of
encouraging idleness, of disgusting people against their proper
employments, and of sinking and debasing all that is truly great and
valuable in the mind.'

Let me warn you, then, my young readers,--nay, more, let me _urge_ you
never to enter this dreadful road. Shun it as you would the road to
destruction. Take not the first step,--the moment you do, all may be
lost. Say not that you can command yourselves, and can stop when you
approach the confines of danger. So thousands have thought as sincerely
as yourselves--and yet they fell. 'The probabilities that we shall fall
where so many have fallen,' says Dr. Dwight, 'are millions to one; and
the contrary opinion is only the dream of lunacy.'

When you are inclined to think yourselves safe, consider the multitudes
who once felt themselves equally so, have been corrupted, distressed,
and ruined by gaming, both for this world, and that which is to come.
Think how many families have been plunged by it in beggary, and
overwhelmed by it in vice. Think how many persons have become liars at
the gaming table; how many perjured; how many drunkards; how many
blasphemers; how many suicides. 'If Europe,' said Montesquieu, 'is to
be ruined, it will be ruined by gaming.' If the United States are to be
ruined, gaming in some of its forms will be a very efficient agent in
accomplishing the work.

Some of the most common games practised in this country, are cards,
dice, billiards, shooting matches, and last, though not _least_,
lotteries. Horse-racing and cockfighting are still in use in some parts
of the United States, though less so than formerly. In addition to the
general remarks already made, I now proceed to notice a few of the
particular forms of this vice.

1. CARDS, DICE, AND BILLIARDS.

The foregoing remarks will be applicable to each of these three modes
of gambling. But in regard to cards, there seems to be something
peculiarly enticing. It is on this account that youth are required to
be doubly cautious on this point. So bewitching were cards and dice
regarded in England, that penalties were laid on those who should be
found playing with them, as early as the reign of George II. Card
playing, however, still prevails in Europe, and to a considerable
extent in the United States. There is a very common impression abroad,
that the mere _playing_ at cards is in itself innocent: that the danger
consists in the tendency to excess; and against excess most people
imagine themselves sufficiently secure. But as 'the best throw at dice,
is to throw them away,' so the best move with cards would be, to commit
them to the flames.

2. SHOOTING MATCHES.

This is a disgraceful practice, which was formerly in extensive use in
these States at particular seasons, especially on the day preceding the
annual Thanksgiving. I am sorry to say, that there are places where it
prevails, even now. Numbers who have nothing better to do, collect
together, near some tavern or grog-shop, for the sole purpose of trying
their skill at shooting fowls. Tied to a stake at a short distance, a
poor innocent and helpless fowl is set as a mark to furnish sport for
idle men and boys.

Could the creature be put out of its misery by the first discharge of
the musket, the evil would not appear so great. But this is seldom the
case. Several discharges are usually made, and between each, a running,
shouting and jumping of the company takes place, not unfrequently
mingled with oaths and curses.

The object of this infernal torture being at length despatched, and
suspended on the muzzle of the gun as a trophy of victory, a rush is
made to the bar or counter, and brandy and rum, accompanied by lewd
stories, and perhaps quarrelling and drunkenness, often close the
scene.

It rarely fails that a number of children are assembled on such
occasions, who listen with high glee to the conversation, whether in
the field or at the inn. If it be the grossest profaneness, or the
coarsest obscenity, they will sometimes pride themselves in imitating
it, thinking it to be manly; and in a like spirit will partake of the
glass, and thus commence the drunkard's career.--This practice is
conducted somewhat differently in different places, but not essentially
so.

It is much to the credit of the citizens of many parts of New England
that their good sense will not, any longer, tolerate a practice so
brutal, and scarcely exceeded in this respect by the cockfights in
other parts of the country. As a substitute for this practice a circle
is drawn on a board or post, of a certain size, and he who can hit
within the circle, gains the fowl. This is still a species of _gaming_,
but is divested of much of the ferocity and brutality of the former.

3. HORSERACING AND COCKFIGHTING.

It is only in particular sections of the United States that public
opinion tolerates these practices extensively. A horserace, in New
England, is a very rare occurrence. A cockfight, few among us have ever
witnessed. Wherever the cruel disposition to indulge in seeing animals
fight together is allowed, it is equally degrading to human nature with
that fondness which is manifested in other countries for witnessing a
bull fight. It is indeed the _same_ disposition, only existing in a
smaller degree in the former case than in the latter.

Montaigne thinks it a reflection upon human nature itself that few
people take delight in seeing beasts caress and play together, while
almost every one is pleased to see them lacerate and worry one another.

Should your lot be cast in a region where any of these inhuman
practices prevail, let it be your constant and firm endeavor, not
merely to keep aloof from them yourselves, but to prevail on all those
over whom God may have given you influence, to avoid them likewise. To
enable you to face the public opinion when a point of importance is at
stake, it will be useful to consult carefully the first chapter of this
work.

I am sorry to have it in my power to state that in the year 1833 there
was a _bull fight_ four miles southward of Philadelphia. It was
attended by about 1500 persons; mostly of the very lowest classes from
the city. It was marked by many of the same evils which attend these
cruel sports in other countries, and by the same reckless disregard of
mercy towards the poor brutes who suffered in the conflict. It is to be
hoped, however, for the honor of human nature, that the good sense of
the community will not permit this detestable custom to prevail.

      [9] Every man who enjoys the privileges of civilized society,
      owes it to that society to earn as much as he can; or, in other
      words, improve every minute of his time. He who loses an hour,
      or a minute, is the price of that hour debtor to the community.
      Moreover, it is a debt which he can never repay.


SECTION II. _On Lotteries._

Lotteries are a species of gambling; differing from other kinds only in
being tolerated either by the law of the land, or by that of public
opinion. The proofs of this assertion are innumerable. Not only young
men, but even married women have, in some instances, become so addicted
to ticket buying, as to ruin themselves and their families.

From the fact that efforts have lately been made in several of the most
influential States in the Union to suppress them, it might seem
unnecessary, at first view, to mention this subject. But although the
letter of the law may oppose them, there is a portion of our citizens
who will continue to buy tickets clandestinely; and consequently
somebody will continue to sell them in the same manner. Penalties will
not suppress them at once. It will be many years before the evil can be
wholly eradicated. The flood does not cease at the moment when the
windows of heaven are closed, but continues, for some time, its
ravages. It is necessary, therefore, that the young should guard
themselves against the temptations which they hold out.

It may be said that important works, such as monuments, and churches,
have been completed by means of lotteries. I know it is so. But the
profits which arise from the sale of tickets are a tax upon the
community, and generally upon the poorer classes: or rather they are a
species of swindling. That good is sometimes done with these ill-gotten
gains, is admitted; but money procured in any other unlawful, immoral,
or criminal way, could be applied to build bridges, roads, churches,
&c. Would the advantages thus secured, however, justify an unlawful
means of securing them? Does the end sanctify the means?

It is said, too, that individuals, as well as associations, have been,
in a few instances, greatly aided by prizes in lotteries. Some
bankrupts have paid their debts, _like_ honest men, with them. This
they might do with stolen money. But cases of even this kind, are rare.
The far greater part of the money drawn in the form of prizes in
lotteries, only makes its possessor more avaricious, covetous, or
oppressive than before. Money obtained in this manner commonly ruins
mind, body, or estate; sometimes all three.

Lottery schemes have been issued in the single State of New York, in
twelve years, to the amount of $37,000,000. If other States have
engaged in the business, in the same proportion to their population,
the sum of all the schemes issued in the United States within that time
has been $240,000,000. A sum sufficient to maintain in comfort, if not
affluence, the entire population of some of the smaller States for more
than thirty years.

Now what has been gained by all this? It is indeed true, that the
discount on this sum, amounting to $36,000,000, has been expended in
paying a set of men for _one_ species of labor. If we suppose their
average salary to have been $500, no less than 6,000 clerks, managers,
&c., may have obtained by this means, a support during the last twelve
years. But what have the 6,000 men _produced_ all this while? Has not
their whole time been spent in receiving small sums (from five to fifty
dollars) from individuals, putting them together, as it were, in a
heap, and afterwards distributing a part of it in sums, with a few
exceptions, equally small?--Have they added one dollar, or even one
cent to the original stock? I have already admitted, that he who makes
two blades of grass grow where only one grew before, is a benefactor to
his country; but these men have not done so much as that.

A few draw prizes, it has been admitted. Some of that few make a good
use of them. But the vast majority are injured. They either become less
active and industrious, or more parsimonious and miserly; and not a few
become prodigals or bankrupts at once. In any of these events, they are
of course unfitted for the essential purposes of human existence. It is
not given to humanity to _bear_ a sudden acquisition of wealth. The
best of men are endangered by it. As in knowledge, so in the present
case, what is gained by hard digging is usually retained; and what is
gained easily usually goes quickly. There is this difference, however,
that the moral character is usually lost with the one, but not always
with the other.

These are a part of the evils connected with lotteries. To compute
their sum total would be impossible. The immense waste of money and
time (and time is money) by those persons who are in the habit of
buying tickets, to say nothing of the cigars smoked, the spirits, wine,
and ale drank, the suppers eaten, and the money lost at cards, while
lounging about lottery offices, although even this constitutes but a
_part_ of the waste, is absolutely incalculable. The suffering of
wives, and children, and parents, and brothers, and sisters, together
with that loss of health, and temper, and reputation, which is either
directly or indirectly connected, would swell the sum to an amount
sufficient to alarm every one, who intends to be an honest,
industrious, and respectable citizen.

It is yours, my young friends, to put a stop to this tremendous evil.
It is your duty, and it should be your pleasure, to give that _tone_ to
the public sentiment, without which, in governments like this, written
laws are powerless.

Do not say that the influence of _one person_ cannot effect much.
Remember that the power of example is almost omnipotent. In debating
whether you may not venture to buy one more ticket, remember that if
you do so, you adopt a course which, if taken by every other individual
in the United States (and who out of thirteen millions has not the same
_right_ as yourself?) would give abundant support to the whole lottery
system, with all its horrors. And could you in that case remain
guiltless? Can the fountains of such a sickly stream be pure? You would
not surely condemn the waters of a mighty river while you were one of a
company engaged in filling the springs and rills that unite to form it.
Remember that just in proportion as you contribute, by your example, to
discourage this species of gambling, just in the same proportion will
you contribute to stay the progress of a tremendous scourge, and to
enforce the execution of good and salutary laws.

With this pernicious practice, I have always been decidedly at war. I
believe the system to be wholly wrong, and that those who countenance
it, in any way whatever, are wholly inexcusable.


SECTION III. _On Theatres._

Much is said by the friends of theatres about what they _might_ be; and
not a few persons indulge the hope that the theatre may yet be made a
school of morality. But my business at present is with it _as it is_,
and as it has hitherto been. The reader will be more benefited by
existing _facts_ than sanguine anticipations, or visionary predictions.

A German medical writer calculates that one in 150 of those who
frequently attend theatres become diseased and die, from the impurity
of the atmosphere. The reason is, that respiration contaminates the
air; and where large assemblies are collected in close rooms, the air
is corrupted much more rapidly than many are aware. Lavoisier, the
French chemist, states, that in a theatre, from the commencement to the
end of the play, the oxygen or vital air is diminished in the
proportion of from 27 to 21, or nearly one fourth; and consequently is
in the same proportion less fit for respiration, than it was before.
This is probably the general truth; but the number of persons present,
and the amount of space, must determine, in a great measure, the
rapidity with which the air is corrupted. The pit is the most unhealthy
part of a play-house, because the carbonic acid which is formed by
respiration is heavier than atmospheric air, and accumulates near the
floor.

It is painful to look round on a gay audience of 1500 persons, and
consider that ten of this number will die in consequence of breathing
the bad air of the room so frequently, and so long. But I believe this
estimate is quite within bounds.

There are however other results to be dreaded. The practice of going
out of a heated, as well as an impure atmosphere late in the evening,
and often without sufficient clothing, exposes the individual to cold,
rheumatism, pleurisy, and fever. Many a young lady,--and, I fear, not a
few young gentlemen,--get the consumption by taking colds in this
manner.

Not only the health of the body, but the mind and morals, too, are
often injured. Dr. Griscom, of New York, in a report on the causes of
vice and crime in that city, made a few years since, says; 'Among the
causes of vicious excitement in our city, none appear to be so powerful
in their nature as theatrical amusements. The number of boys and young
men who have become determined thieves, in order to procure the means
of introduction to the theatres and circuses, would appal the feelings
of every virtuous mind, could the whole truth be laid open before them.

'In the case of the feebler sex, the result is still worse. A relish
for the amusements of the theatre, without the means of indulgence,
becomes too often a motive for listening to the first suggestion of the
seducer, and thus prepares the unfortunate captive of sensuality for
the haunts of infamy, and a total destitution of all that is valuable
in the mind and character of woman.'

The following fact is worthy of being considered by the friends and
patrons of theatres. During the progress of one of the most ferocious
revolutions which ever shocked the face of heaven, theatres, in Paris
alone, multiplied from six to twenty-five. Now one of two conclusions
follow from this: Either the spirit of the times produced the
institutions, or the institutions cherished the spirit of the times;
and this will certainly prove that they are either the parents of vice
or the offspring of it.

The philosopher Plato assures us, that 'plays raise the passions, and
prevent the use of them; and of course are dangerous to morality.'

'The seeing of _Comedies_,' says Aristotle, 'ought to be forbidden to
young people, till age and discipline have made them proof against
debauchery.'

Tacitus says, 'The German women were guarded against danger, and
preserved their purity by having no play-houses among them.'

Even Ovid represents theatrical amusements as a grand source of
corruption, and he advised Augustus to suppress them.

The infidel philosopher Rousseau, declared himself to be of opinion,
that the theatre is, in all cases, a school of vice. Though he had
himself written for the stage, yet, when it was proposed to establish a
theatre in the city of Geneva, he wrote against the project with zeal
and great force, and expressed the opinion that every friend of pure
morals ought to oppose it.

Sir John Hawkins, in his life of Johnson, observes:--'Although it is
said of plays that they teach morality, and of the stage that it is the
mirror of human life, these assertions are mere declamation, and have
no foundation in truth or experience. On the contrary, a play-house,
and the regions about it, are the very hot-beds of vice.'

Archbishop Tillotson, after some pointed and forcible reasoning against
it, pronounces the play-house to be 'the devil's chapel,' 'a nursery of
licentiousness and vice,' and 'a recreation which ought not to be
allowed among a civilized, much less a Christian people.'

Bishop Collier solemnly declared, that he was persuaded that 'nothing
had done more to debauch the age in which he lived, than the stage
poets and the play-house.'

Sir Matthew Hale, having in early life experienced the pernicious
effects of attending the theatre, resolved, when he came to London,
never to see a play again, and to this resolution he adhered through
life.

Burgh says; 'What does it avail that the piece itself be
unexceptionable, if it is to be interlarded with lewd songs or dances,
and tagged at the conclusion with a ludicrous and beastly farce? I
cannot therefore, in conscience, give youth any other advice than to
avoid such diversions as cannot be indulged without the utmost danger
of perverting their taste, and corrupting their morals.'

Dr. Johnson's testimony on this subject is nearly as pointed as that of
Archbishop Tillotson; and Lord Kaimes speaks with much emphasis of the
'poisonous influence,' of theatres.

Their evil tendency is seldom better illustrated than by the following
anecdote, from an individual in New York, on whose statements we may
place the fullest reliance.

'F. B. a young man of about twenty-two, called on the writer in the
fall of 1831 for employment. He was a journeyman printer; was recently
from Kentucky; and owing to his want of employment, as he said, was
entirely destitute, not only of the comforts, but the necessaries of
life. I immediately procured him a respectable boarding house, gave him
employment, and rendered his situation as comfortable as my limited
means would permit.

'He had not been with me long, before he expressed a desire to go to
the theatre. Some great actor was to perform on a certain night, and he
was very anxious to see him. I warned him of the consequences, and told
him, my own experience and observation had convinced me that it was a
very dangerous place for young men to visit. But my warning did no
good. He neglected his business, and went. I reproved him gently, but
retained him in my employment. He continued to go, notwithstanding all
my remonstrances to the contrary. At length my business suffered so
much from his neglecting to attend to it as he ought, that I was under
the necessity of discharging him in self-defence. He got temporary
employment in different offices of the city, where the same fault was
found with him. Immediately after, he accepted a situation of
bar-keeper in a porter house or tavern attached to the theatre. His
situation he did not hold long--from what cause, I know not.

'He again applied to me for work; but as his habits were not reformed,
I did not think it prudent to employ him, although I said or did
nothing to injure him in the estimation of others. Disappointed in
procuring employment in a business to which he had served a regular
apprenticeship, being pennyless, and seeing no bright prospect for the
future, he enlisted as a common soldier in the United States' service.

'He had not been in his new vocation long, before he was called upon,
with other troops, to defend our citizens from the attacks of the
Indians. But when the troops had nearly reached their place of
destination, that 'invisible scourge,' the cholera, made its appearance
among them. Desertion was the consequence, and among others who fled,
was the subject of this article.

'He returned to New York--made application at several different offices
for employment, without success. In a few days news came that he had
been detected in pilfering goods from the house of his landlord. A
warrant was immediately issued for him--he was seized, taken to the
police office--convicted, and sentenced to six months' hard labor in
the penitentiary. His name being published in the newspapers, in
connection with those of other convicts--was immediately recognised by
the officer under whom he had enlisted.--This officer proceeds to the
city--claims the prisoner--and it is at length agreed that he shall
return to the United States' service, where he shall, for the first six
months, be compelled to roll sand as a punishment for desertion, serve
out the five years for which he had enlisted, and then be given up to
the city authorities, to suffer for the crime of pilfering.

'It is thus that we see a young man, of good natural abilities,
scarcely twenty-three years of age, compelled to lose six of the most
valuable years of his life, besides ruining a fair reputation, and
bringing disgrace upon his parents and friends, from the apparently
harmless desire of seeing dramatic performances. Ought not this to be a
warning to others, who are travelling on, imperceptibly in the same
road to ruin?'

                     *      *      *      *      *

Theatres are of ancient date. One built of wood, in the time of Cicero
and Caesar, would contain 80,000 persons. The first stone theatre in
Rome, was built by Pompey, and would contain 40,000. There are one or
two in Europe, at the present time, that will accommodate 4,000 or
5,000.

In England, until 1660, public opinion did not permit _females_ to
perform in theatres, but the parts were performed by boys.

If theatres have a reforming tendency, this result might have been
expected in France, where they have so long been popular and
flourishing. In 1807, there were in France 166 theatres, and 3968
performers. In 1832 there were in Paris alone 17, which could
accommodate 21,000 persons. But we do not find that they reformed the
Parisians; and it is reasonable to expect they never will.

Let young men remember, that in this, as well as in many other things,
there is only one point of security, viz. total abstinence.


SECTION IV. _Use of Tobacco._

1. SMOKING.

Smoking has every where, in Europe and America, become a tremendous
evil; and if we except Holland and Germany, nowhere more so than in
this country. Indeed we are already fast treading in the steps of those
countries, and the following vivid description of the miseries which
this filthy practice entails on the Germans will soon be quite
applicable to the people of the United States, unless we can induce the
rising generation to turn the current of public opinion against it.

'This plague, like the Egyptian plague of frogs, is felt every where,
and in every thing. It poisons the streets, the clubs, and the
coffee-houses;--furniture, clothes, equipage, persons, are redolent of
the abomination. It makes even the dulness of the newspapers doubly
narcotic: every eatable and drinkable, all that can be seen, felt,
heard or understood, is saturated with tobacco;--the very air we
breathe is but a conveyance for this poison into the lungs; and every
man, woman, and child, rapidly acquires the complexion of a boiled
chicken. From the hour of their waking, if nine-tenths of their
population can be said to awake at all, to the hour of their lying
down, the pipe is never out of their mouths. One mighty fumigation
reigns, and human nature is smoked dry by tens of thousands of square
miles. The German physiologists compute, that of 20 deaths, between
eighteen and thirty-five years, 10 originate in the waste of the
constitution by smoking.'

This is indeed a horrid picture; but when it is considered that the
best estimates which can be made concur in showing that tobacco, to the
amount of $16,000,000, is consumed in the United States annually, and
that by far the greater part of this is in smoking cigars, there is
certainly room for gloomy apprehensions. What though we do not use the
dirty pipe of the Dutch and Germans? If we only use the _tobacco_, the
mischief is effectually accomplished. Perhaps it were even better that
we should lay out a part of our money for pipes, than to spend the
whole for tobacco.

Smoking is indecent, filthy, and rude, and to many individuals highly
offensive. When first introduced into Europe, in the 16th century, its
use was prohibited under very severe penalties, which in some countries
amounted even to cutting off the nose. And how much better is the
practice of voluntarily burning up our noses, by making a chimney of
them? I am happy, however, in being able to state, that this
unpardonable practice is now abandoned in many of the fashionable
societies in Europe.

There is one remarkable fact to be observed in speaking on this
subject. No parent ever teaches his child the use of tobacco, or even
encourages it, except by his example. Thus the smoker virtually
condemns himself in the very 'thing which he alloweth.' It is not
precisely so in the case of spirits; for many parents directly
encourage the use of that.

Tobacco is one of the most powerful poisons in nature. Even the
physician, some of whose medicines are so active that a few grains, or
a few drops, will destroy life at once, finds tobacco too powerful for
his use; and in those cases where it is most clearly required, only
makes it a last resort. Its daily use, in any form, deranges, and
sometimes destroys the stomach and nerves, produces weakness, low
spirits, dyspepsy, vertigo, and many other complaints. These are its
more immediate effects.

Its remoter effects are scarcely less dreadful. It dries the mouth and
nostrils, and probably the brain; benumbs the senses of smell and
taste, impairs the hearing, and ultimately the eye-sight. Germany, a
_smoking_ nation, is at the same time, a _spectacled_ nation. More than
all this; it dries the blood; creates thirst and loss of appetite; and
in this and other ways, often lays the foundation of intemperance. In
fact, not a few persons are made drunkards by this very means. Dr. Rush
has a long chapter on this subject in one of his volumes, which is well
worth your attention. In addition to all this, it has often been
observed that in fevers and other diseases, medicines never operate
well in constitutions which have been accustomed to the use of tobacco.

Of the expense which the use of it involves, I have already spoken. Of
the $16,000,000 thus expended, $9,000,000 are supposed to be for
smoking Spanish cigars; $6,500,000 for smoking American tobacco, and
for chewing it; and $500,000 for snuff.

Although many people of real intelligence become addicted to this
practice, as is the case especially among the learned in Germany, yet
it cannot be denied that in general, those individuals and _nations_
whose mental powers are the weakest, are (in proportion to their means
of acquiring it) most enslaved to it. To be convinced of the truth of
this remark, we have only to open our eyes to facts as they exist
around us.

All ignorant and savage _nations_ indulge in extraordinary stimulants,
(and tobacco among the rest,) whenever they have the means of obtaining
them; and in proportion to their degradation. Thus it is with the
native tribes of North America; thus with the natives of Africa, Asia,
and New Holland; thus with the Cretins and Gypsies. Zimmerman says,
that the latter 'suspended their predatory excursions, and on an
appointed evening in every week, assemble to enjoy their guilty spoils
in the fumes of _strong waters_ and _tobacco_.' Here they are
represented as indulging in idle tales about the character and conduct
of those around them; a statement which can very easily be believed by
those who have watched the effects produced by the fumes of stimulating
beverages much more '_respectable_' than spirits or tobacco smoke.

The quantity which is used in civilized nations is almost incredibly
great. England alone imported, in 1829, 22,400,000 lbs. of
unmanufactured tobacco. There is no narcotic plant--not even the tea
plant--in such extensive use, unless it is the _betel_ of India and the
adjoining countries. _This_ is the leaf of a climbing plant resembling
ivy, but of the pepper tribe. The people of the east chew it so
incessantly, and in such quantities, that their lips become quite red,
and their teeth black--showing that it has affected their whole
systems. They carry it about them in boxes, and offer it to each other
in compliment, as the Europeans do snuff; and it is considered uncivil
and unkind to refuse to accept and chew it. This is done by the women
as well as by the men. Were we disposed, we might draw from this fact
many important lessons on our own favored stimulants.

In view of the great and growing evil of smoking, the practical
question arises; 'What shall be done?' The answer is--Render it
unfashionable and disreputable. Do you ask, '_How_ is this to be
accomplished?' Why, how has alcohol been rendered unpopular? Do you
still say, 'One person alone cannot effect much?' But so might any
person have said a few years ago, in regard to spirits. Individuals
must commence the work of reformation in the one case, as well as in
the other; and success will then be equally certain.

2. CHEWING.

Many of the remarks already made apply with as much force to the use of
tobacco in every form, as to the mere habit of smoking. But I have a
few additional thoughts on chewing this plant.

There are never wanting excuses for any thing which we feel strongly
inclined to do. Thus a thousand little frivolous pleas are used for
chewing tobacco. One man of reputed good sense told me that his tobacco
probably cost him nothing, for if he did not use it, he 'should be apt
to spend as much worth of time in _picking and eating summer fruits_,
as would pay for it.' Now I do not like the practice of eating even
summer fruits between meals; but they are made to be eaten moderately,
no doubt; and if people will not eat them _with_ their food, it is
generally a less evil to eat them between meals, than not at all. But
the truth is, tobacco chewers never relish these things at any time.

The only plea for chewing this noxious plant, which is entitled to a
serious consideration is, that it tends to preserve the teeth. This is
the strong hold of tobacco chewers--not, generally, when they commence
the practice, but as soon as they find themselves slaves to it.

Now the truth appears to be this:

1. 'When a tooth is decayed in such a manner as to leave the nerve
exposed, there is no doubt that the powerful stimulus of tobacco must
greatly diminish its sensibility. But there are very many other
substances, less poisonous, whose occasional application would
accomplish the same result, and without deadening, at the same time,
the sensibilities of the whole system, as tobacco does.

2. The person who chews tobacco, generally puts a piece in his mouth
immediately after eating. This is immediately moved from place to
place, and not only performs, in some measure, the offices of a brush
and toothpick, but produces a sudden flow of saliva; and in consequence
of both of these causes combined, the teeth are effectually cleansed;
and cleanliness is undoubtedly one of the most effectual preventives of
decay in teeth yet known. Yet there are far better means of cleansing
the mouth and teeth after eating than by means of tobacco.

If there be any other known reasons why tobacco should preserve teeth,
I am ignorant of them. There are then no arguments of any weight for
using it; while there are a multitude of very strong reasons against
it. I might add them, in this place, but it appears to me unnecessary.

3. TAKING SNUFF.

I have seen many individuals who would not, on any account whatever,
use spirits, or chew tobacco; but who would not hesitate to dry up
their nasal membranes, injure their speech, induce catarrhal
affections, and besmear their face, clothes, books, &c. with _snuff_.
This, however common, appears to me ridiculous. Almost all the serious
evils which result from smoking and chewing, follow the practice of
snuffing powdered tobacco into the nose. Even Chesterfield opposes it,
when after characterizing all use of tobacco or snuff, in any form, as
both vulgar and filthy, he adds: 'Besides, snuff-takers are generally
very dull and shallow people, and have recourse to it merely as a
fillip to the brain; by all means, therefore, avoid the filthy custom.'
This censure, though rather severe, is equally applicable to smoking
and chewing.

Naturalists say there is one species of maggot fly that mistakes the
odor of some kinds of snuff for that of putrid substances, and deposits
its eggs in it. In warm weather therefore, it must be dangerous to take
snuff which has been exposed to these insects; for the eggs sometimes
hatch in two hours, and the most tremendous consequences might follow.
And it is not impossible that some of the most painful diseases to
which the human race are liable, may have been occasionally produced by
this or a similar cause. The 'tic douloureux' is an example.

A very common disease in sheep is known to be produced by worms in
cavities which communicate with the nose. Only a little acquaintance
with the human structure would show that there are a number of cavities
in the bones of the face and head, some of which will hold half an
ounce each, which communicate with the nose, and into which substances
received into this organ occasionally fall, but cannot escape as easily
as they enter.


SECTION V. _Useful Recreations._

The young, I shall be told, must and will have their recreations; and
if they are to be denied every species of gaming, what shall they do?
'You would not, surely, have them spend their leisure hours in
gratifying the senses; in eating, drinking, and licentiousness.'

By no means. Recreations they must have; active recreation, too, in the
open air. Some of the most appropriate are playing ball, quoits,
ninepins, and other athletic exercises; but in no case for money, or
any similar consideration. _Skating_ is a good exercise in its proper
season, if followed with great caution. _Dancing_, for those who sit
much, such as pupils in school, tailors and shoemakers, would be an
appropriate exercise, if it were not perpetually abused. By assembling
in large crowds, continuing it late at evening, and then sallying out
in a perspiration, into the cold or damp night air, a thousand times
more mischief has been done, than all the benefit which it has afforded
would balance. It were greatly to be wished that this exercise might be
regulated by those rules which human experience has indicated, instead
of being subject to the whim and caprice of fashion. It is a great pity
an exercise so valuable to the sedentary, and especially those who
_sit_ much, of both sexes, should be so managed as to injure half the
world, and excite against it the prejudices of the other half.

I have said that the young must have recreations, and generally in the
open air. The reason why they should usually be conducted in the open
air, is, that their ordinary occupations too frequently confine them
within doors, and of course in an atmosphere more or less vitiated.
Farmers, gardeners, rope makers, and persons whose occupations are of
an active nature, do not need out-of-door sports at all. Their
recreations should be by the fire side. Not with cards or dice, nor in
the company of those whose company is not worth having. But the book,
the newspaper, conversation, or the lyceum, will be the appropriate
recreations for these classes, and will be found in the highest degree
satisfactory. For the evening, the lyceum is particularly adapted,
because laboring young men are often too much fatigued at night, to
think, closely; and the lyceum, or conversation, will be more
agreeable, and not less useful. But the family circle may of itself
constitute a lyceum, and the book or the newspaper may be made the
subject of discussion. I have known the heads of families in one
neighborhood greatly improved, and the whole neighborhood derive an
impulse, from the practice of meeting one evening in the week, to read
the news together, and converse on the more interesting intelligence of
the day.

Some strongly recommend 'the sports of the field,' and talk with
enthusiasm of 'hunting, coursing, fishing;' and of 'dogs and horses.'
But these are no recreations for me. True they are _healthy_ to the
body; but not to the morals. This I say confidently, although some of
my readers may smile, and call it an affectation of sensibility. Yet
with Cowper,

    'I would not enter on my list of friends
    The man who needlessly sets foot upon a worm.'

If the leading objects of field sports were to procure sustenance, I
would not say a word. But the very term _sports_, implies something
different. And shall we sport with _life_--even that of the inferior
animals? That which we cannot give, shall we presumptuously dare to
take away, and as our only apology say, 'Am I not in sport?'

Besides, other amusements equally healthy, and if we are accustomed to
them, equally pleasant, and much more rational, can be substituted.
What they are, I have mentioned, at least in part. How a sensible man,
and especially a Christian, can hunt or fish, when he would not do it,
were it not for the pleasure he enjoys in the cruelty it
involves;--how, above all, a wise father can recommend it to his
children, or to others, I am utterly unable to conceive!



