
CHAPTER V.

Social and Moral Improvement.


SECTION I. _Of Female Society, in general._

No young man is fully aware how much he is indebted to female influence
in forming his character. Happy for him if his mother and sisters were
his principal companions in infancy. I do not mean to exclude the
society of the father, of course; but the father's avocations usually
call him away from home, or at least from the immediate presence of his
children, for a very considerable proportion of his time.

It would be easy to show, without the possibility of mistake, that it
is those young men who are shut out either by accident or design, from
female society, that most despise it. And on this account, I cannot but
regret the supposed necessity which prevails of having separate schools
for the two sexes; unless it were _professional_ ones--I mean for the
study of law, medicine, &c. There is yet too much practical
Mohammedanism and Paganism in our manner of educating the young.

If we examine the character and conduct of woman as it now is, and as
history shows it to have been in other periods of the world, we shall
see that much of the good and evil which has fallen upon mankind has
been through her influence. We may see that man has often been
influenced _directly_ by the soft warning words, or the still more
powerful weapons--tears--of woman, to do that to which whole legions of
soldiers never could have driven him.

Now the same influence which is exerted by mothers and wives is also
exerted, in a smaller degree, by sisters; and indeed by the female sex
generally. When, therefore, I find a young man professing a disregard
for their society, or frequenting only the worst part of it, I always
expect to find in him a soul which would not hesitate long, in the day
of temptation, to stoop to vicious if not base actions. Who would
despise the fountain at which he is refreshed daily? Above all, who
would willingly contaminate it? But how much better than this is it to
show by our language, as well as deeds, that we hold this portion of
the world in disdain; and only meet with them, if we meet them at all,
to comply with custom, or for purposes still more unworthy; instead of
seeking their society as a means of elevating and ennobling the
character?

When, therefore, a young man begins to affect the _wit_, and to utter
sarcasms against the female character, it may be set down as a mark,
either of a weak head, or a base heart; for it cannot be good sense or
gratitude, or justice, or honorable feeling of any kind. There are
indeed nations, it is said, where a boy, as soon as he puts off the
dress of a child, beats his mother, to show his manhood. These people
live in the interior of Africa, and there let them remain. Let us be
careful that we do not degrade the sex, in the same manner, by
disrespectful language, or actions, or _thoughts_. We should '_think_
no evil,' on this subject; for let it never be forgotten, that our own
happiness and elevation of character must ever be in exact proportion
to that of females. Degrade _them_, and we degrade ourselves; neglect
to raise their moral and intellectual condition as much as possible,
and you neglect the readiest and most certain means of promoting, in
the end, your own comfort and happiness.

If any of your elder associates defame the sex, you can hardly be
mistaken when you suspect them of having vitiated their taste for what
is excellent in human character by improper intimacies, or still more
abominable vices. The man who says he has never found a virtuous female
character, you may rely upon it, cannot himself be virtuous.

In civilized society much of our time must _necessarily_ be spent among
females. These associations will have influence upon us. Either they
are perpetually improving our character, or, on the other hand, by
increasing our disregard or disgust, debasing it. Is it not wisdom,
then, to make what we can of the advantages and opportunities which
their society affords us?

The very presence of a respectable female will often restrain those
from evil whose hearts are full of it. It is not easy to talk or to
look obscenely, or even to behave with rudeness and ill manners under
such restraint. Who has not seen the jarring and discordant tones of a
company of rude men and boys hushed at once by the sudden arrival of a
lady of dignified manners and appearance?

The frequent, the habitual society of one whom a youth respects, must
have a happy tendency to make him love honorable conduct; and restrain
his less honorable feelings. Frequent restraint tends to give the
actual mastery; therefore every approach towards this must be of great
value. There is a delicacy, too, in female society, which serves well
to check the boisterous, to tame the brutal, and to embolden the timid.
Whatever be the innate character of a youth, it may be polished, and
exalted, by their approbation. He must be unusually hardened that can
come from some shameful excess, or in a state of inebriety, into the
company of the ladies.

Sometimes a diffident youth has been taken under the _protection_, if
it may be so called, of a considerate and respectable woman. A woman of
proper dignity of manners and character, especially with a few years'
advantage, can do this without the least injury to herself, and without
stepping a hair's breadth beyond the bounds which should surround her
sex. Happy is the young man who enjoys a fostering care so important;
he may learn the value of the sex; learn to discriminate among them, to
esteem many of them, and prize their approbation; and in time, deserve
it. It is obvious that the favor of silly, flirting girls, (and there
are some such) is not what I am here recommending.

Where the character of such society is pure, where good sense,
cultivation, intellect, modesty, and superior age, distinguish the
parties, it is no small honor to a young man to enjoy it. Should he be
conscious that epithets of a different and of a contrary quality belong
to them, it is no honor to him to be their favorite. He must be _like_
them, in some degree, or they would not approve him.


SECTION II. _Advice and Friendship of Mothers._

When you seek female society for the sake of improvement, it is proper
you should begin where nature begun with you. You have already been
encouraged to respect your mother; I go a step farther; and say, Make
her your friend. Unless your own misconduct has already been very
great, she will not be so far estranged from you, as not to rejoice at
the opportunity of bestowing that attention to you which the warmest
wishes for your welfare would dictate. If your errors _have_, on the
contrary, created a wide distance between you, endeavor to restore the
connection as soon as possible. I do not undervalue a father's counsel
and guidance; yet however excellent his judgment may be, your mother's
opinion is not only a help to your own; but as a _woman's_, it has its
peculiar character, and may have its appropriate value. _Women_
sometimes see at a glance, what a _man_ must go round through a train
of argument to discover. Their _tact_ is delicate, and therefore
quicker in operation. Sometimes, it is true, their judgment will not
only be prompt, but premature. Your _own_ judgment must assist you
here. Do not, however, proudly despise your mother's;--but examine it.
It will generally well repay the trouble; and the habit of consulting
her will increase habits of consideration, and self command; and
promote propriety of conduct.

If a mother be a woman of sense, why should you not profit by her long
exercised intelligence? Nay, should she even be deficient in
cultivation, or in native talent, yet her experience is something, and
her love for you will, in part, make up for such deficiency. It cannot
be worthiness to despise, or wisdom to neglect your mother's opinion.


SECTION III. _Society of Sisters._

Have you a sister?--Have you several of them? Then you are favorably
situated; especially if one of them is older than yourself. She has
done playing with dolls, and you with bats and balls. She is more
womanly; her carriage becomes dignified. Do not oblige her, by your
boyish behavior, to keep you at a distance. Try to deserve the
character of her friend. She will sometimes look to you for little
services, which require strength and agility; let her look up to you
for judgment, steadiness, and counsel too. You may be mutually
beneficial. Your affection, and your intertwining interest in each
other's welfare, will hereby be much increased.

A sister usually present, is that sort of second conscience, which,
like the fairy ring, in an old story, pinches the wearer whenever he is
doing any thing amiss. Without occasioning so much awe as a mother, or
so much reserve as a stranger, her sex, her affection, and the
familiarity between you will form a compound of no small value in
itself, and of no small influence, if you duly regard it, upon your
growing character. Never for one moment suppose _that_ a good joke at
which a sister blushes, or turns pale, or even looks anxious. If you
should not at first perceive what there is in it which is amiss, it
will be well worth your while to examine all over again. Perhaps a
single glance of her eye will explain your inconsiderateness; and as
you value consistency and propriety of conduct, let it put you on your
guard.

There is a sort of attention due to the sex which is best attained by
practising at home. Your mother may sometimes require this attention,
your sisters still oftener. Do not require calling, or teasing, or even
persuading to go abroad with them when their safety, their comfort, or
their respectability require it. It is their due; and stupid or unkind
is he who does not esteem it so. In performing this service, you are
only paying a respect to yourself. Your sister could, indeed, come home
alone, but it would be a sad reflection on you were she obliged to do
so. Accustom yourself, then, to wait upon her; it will teach you to
wait upon others by and by; and in the meantime, it will give a
graceful polish to your character.

It will be well for you, if your sisters have young friends whose
acquaintance with them may bring you sometimes into their society. The
familiarity allowable with your sisters, though it may well prepare you
to show suitable attention to other ladies, yet has its disadvantages.
You need sometimes to have those present who may keep you still more
upon your guard; and render your manners and attention to them still
more respectful.


SECTION IV. _General Remarks and Advice._

Never seek, then, to avoid respectable female society. Total privation
has its dangers, as well as too great intimacy. One of the bad results
of such a privation, is, that you run the risk of becoming attached to
unworthy objects because they first fall in your way. Human nature is
ever in danger of perversion. Those passions which God has given you
for the wisest and noblest purposes may goad you onward, and, if they
do not prove the occasion of your destruction in one way, they may in
another. If you should be preserved in solitude, you will not be quite
safe abroad. Having but a very imperfect conception of the different
shades of character among the sex, you will be ready to suppose all are
excellent who appear fair and all good who appear gentle.

I have alluded to the dangers of too great intimacy. Nothing here
advanced is intended to make you a mere trifler, or to sink the dignity
of your own sex. Although you are to respect females because of their
sex, yet there are some who bestow upon them a species of attention
extremely injurious to themselves, and unpleasant and degrading to all
sensible ladies.

There is still another evil sometimes resulting from too great
intimacy. It is that you lead the other party to mistake your object.
This mistake is easily made. It is not necessary, to this end, that you
should make any professions of attachment, in word or deed. Looks, nay
even something less than this, though it may be difficult to define it,
may indicate that sort of preference for the society of a lady, that
has sometimes awakened an attachment in her which you never suspected
or intended. Or what is a far less evil, since it falls chiefly on
yourself, it may lead her and others to ridicule you for what they
suppose to be the result, on your part, of intention.

Let me caution you, then, if you would obey the golden rule of doing to
others as you would wish others should do to you, in the same
circumstances, and if you value, besides this, your own peace, to
beware of injuring those whom you highly esteem, by leading them by
words, looks, or actions, to that misapprehension of your meaning which
may be the means of planting thorns in their bosoms, if not in your
own.

There is another error to which I wish to call your attention, in this
place, although it might more properly be placed under the head,
_Seduction_. I allude to the error of too great familiarity with
others, after your heart is already pledged to a particular favorite.
Here, more, if possible, than in the former case, do you need to set a
guard over all your ways, words, and actions; and to resolve, in the
strength, and with the aid of Divine grace, that you will never deviate
from that rule of conduct toward others,--which Divine Goodness has
given, as the grand text to the book of human duty.

The general idea presented in the foregoing sections, of what a woman
ought to be, is sufficient to guide you, with a little care in the
application. Such as are forward, soon become tedious. Their character
is what no man of taste will bear. Some are even anglers, aiming to
catch gudgeons by every look; placing themselves in attitudes to allure
the vagrant eye. Against such it is quite unnecessary that I should
warn you; they usually give you sufficient notice themselves. The
trifler can scarcely amuse you for an evening. The company of a lady
who has nothing to say but what is commonplace, whose inactive mind
never for once stumbles upon an idea of its own, must be dull, as a
matter of course. You can learn nothing from her, unless it be the
folly of a vacant mind. Come away, lest you catch the same disorder.

The artful and manoeuvring, on the contrary, will, at a glance,
penetrate your inmost mind, and become any thing which they perceive
will be agreeable to you.

Should your lot be cast where you can enjoy the society of a few
intelligent, agreeable, and respectable females, remember to prize the
acquisition. If you do not derive immense advantage from it, the fault
must be your own. If, in addition to the foregoing qualifications,
these female friends happen to have had a judicious and useful, rather
than a merely polite education, your advantages are doubly valuable.

The genial influence of such companions must unavoidably be on the side
of goodness and propriety. Loveliness of mind will impart that
agreeableness of person which recommends to the heart every sentiment,
gives weight to every argument, justifies every opinion, and soothes to
recollection and recovery those who, were they reproved by any other
voice, might have risen to resistance, or sunk into despair. The only
necessary caution in the case is, 'Beware of _idolatry_.' Keep yourself
clear from fascination, and call in the aid of your severest judgment
to keep your mind true to yourself, and to principle.


SECTION V. _Lyceums and other Social Meetings._

The course of my remarks has given occasion, in several instances, to
speak of the importance of lyceums as a means of mental and social
improvement. It will not be necessary therefore, in this place, to
dwell, at _length_, on their importance. My principal object will be to
call your attention to the subject in general, and urge it upon your
consideration. I hope no young person who reads these pages, will
neglect to avail himself of the advantages which a good lyceum affords;
or if there are none of that character within his reach, let him make
unremitting efforts till one exists.

Although these institutions are yet in their infancy, and could hardly
have been expected to accomplish more within the same period than they
have, it is hoped they will not hereafter confine their inquiries so
exclusively to matters of mere intellect, as has often been done. There
are other subjects nearer home, if I may so say, than these. How
strangely do mankind, generally, stretch their thoughts and inquiries
abroad to the concerns of other individuals, states and nations, and
forget themselves, and the objects and beings near by them, and their
mutual relations, connections, and dependencies!

Lyceums, when they shall have obtained a firmer footing among us, may
become a most valuable means of enlightening the mass of the community,
in regard to the structure and laws of the human body, and its relation
to surrounding objects; of discussing the philosophy of dress, and its
different materials for different seasons; of food, and drink, and
sleep and exercise; of dwellings and other buildings; of amusements and
employments;--in short, of the ten thousand _little things_, as many
call them, which go to make up human life, with its enjoyments or
miseries. These things have been surprisingly overlooked by most men,
for the sake of attending to others, whose bearing on human happiness,
if not often questionable, is at least more remote.

In some of our larger cities there are respectable courses of useful
lectures established during the months of winter, and sometimes
throughout the year. Added to this are reading-rooms, and various sorts
of libraries, which are accessible for a small sum, and sometimes for
almost nothing. There have been three valuable courses of Franklin
Lectures delivered in Boston, during the three last winters, of twenty
lectures each, for only fifty cents a course. In most large towns,
benevolent and spirited individuals might establish something of the
same kind, at least every winter.


SECTION VI. _Moral Instruction._

It was not my intention, at first, to say a single word, directly, on
the subject of religion, but I should leave this chapter very
incomplete indeed, as well as do violence to my own feelings, should I
say nothing at all of Bible classes, and other means of religious
instruction, with which the age, and especially this part of the
country abounds, not only on Sundays, but during the long evenings of
leisure which, for a part of the year, many young men enjoy.

Viewed merely as a means of improving the _mind_, and acquiring much
authentic historical information to be found nowhere else, the study of
the Bible is a most valuable exercise, and ought to be encouraged. To
adults who labor, a walk to church, and prompt attention to the Bible
lesson, is happily adapted to the health of the body, no less than to
intellectual improvement; and whatever objections might be urged
against subjecting infants and young children who attend other schools
during the week, to the present routine of Sabbath instruction, I am
quite sure that the class of young persons for whom I am writing, would
derive the most lasting benefit from studying the Bible.

I have made these remarks on the presumption that they were to derive
no _moral_ improvement from Bible instruction. However, I see not how
these schools can be long attended by ingenuous minds without inspiring
a _respect_, at the least, for that book which is superior to all other
books, and for that religion which it inculcates; which is above all
sect, and beyond all price.


SECTION VII. _Of Female Society in reference to Marriage._

It is now time to consider the subject of female society in reference
to matrimony. I shall find it necessary, however, to make a division of
my subject, reserving a more _complete_ view of female qualifications
for a succeeding chapter.

Whatever advice may be given to the contrary by friends or foes, it is
my opinion that you ought to keep matrimony steadily in view. For this
end, were it for no other, you ought to mingle much in society. Never
consider yourself complete without this other half of yourself. It is
too much the fashion among young men at the present day to make up
their minds to dispense with marriage;--an unnatural, and therefore an
unwise plan. Much of our character, and most of our comfort and
happiness depend upon it. Many have found this out too late; that is,
after age and fixed habits had partly disqualified them for this
important duty.

All that has been hitherto said of female influence bears upon this
point. According to the character of the person you select, in a
considerable degree, will be your own. Should a mere face fascinate you
to a _doll_, you will not need much mental energy to please her; and
the necessity of exertion on this account being small, your own self
will sink, or at least not rise, as it otherwise might do.

But were I personally acquainted with you, and should I perceive an
_honorable_ attachment taking possession of your heart, I should regard
it as a happy circumstance. Life then has an object. The only thing to
be observed is that it be managed with prudence, honor, and good sense.

The case of John Newton is precisely in point. In very early life this
man formed a strong attachment to a lady, under circumstances which did
not permit him to make it known; which was probably well for both
parties. It did not diminish _her_ happiness, so long as she remained
in ignorance on the subject; and in scenes of sorrow, suffering, and
temptation, the hope of one day obtaining her soothed him, and kept him
from performing many dishonorable actions. 'The bare possibility,' he
says, 'of seeing her again, was the only obvious means of restraining
me from the most horrid designs, against myself and others.'

The wish to marry, if _prudently_ indulged, will lead to honest and
persevering exertions to obtain a reasonable income--one which will be
satisfactory to the object of your hopes, as well as to her friends. He
who is determined on living a single life, very naturally contracts his
endeavors to his own narrow personal wants, or else squanders freely,
in the belief that he can always procure enough to support himself.
Indeed it cannot have escaped even the careless observer that in
proportion as an individual relinquishes the idea of matrimony, just in
the same proportion do his mind and feelings contract. On the contrary,
that hope which aims at a beloved partner--a family--a fireside,--will
lead its possessor to activity in all his conduct. It will elicit his
talents, and urge them to their full energy, and probably call in the
aid of economy; a quality so indispensable to every condition of life.
The single consideration, 'What would she think were she now to see
me?' called up by the obtrusion of a favorite image,--how often has it
stimulated a noble mind and heart to deeds which otherwise had never
been performed!

I repeat it, I am aware that this advice is liable to abuse. But what
shall be done? Images of some sort will haunt the mind more or
less--female influence in some shape or other will operate. Is it not
better to give the imagination a virtuous direction than to leave it to
range without control, and without _end_?

I repeat it, nothing is better calculated to preserve a young man from
the contamination of low pleasures and pursuits, than frequent
intercourse with the more refined and virtuous of the other sex.
Besides, without such society his manners can never acquire the true
polish of a gentleman,--general character, dignity, and
refinement;--nor his mind and heart the truest and noblest sentiments
of a man. Make it an object then, I again say, to spend some portion of
every week of your life in the company of intelligent and virtuous
ladies. At all events, flee solitude, and especially the exclusive
society of your own sex. The doctrines even of Zimmerman, the great
apostle of solitude, would put to shame many young men, who seldom or
never mix in female society.

If you should be so unfortunate as not to have among your acquaintance
any ladies whose society would, in these points of view, be profitable
to you, do not be in haste to mix with the ignorant and vulgar; but
wait patiently till your own industry and good conduct shall give you
admission to better circles; and in the meantime cultivate your mind by
reading and thinking, so that when you actually gain admission to good
society, you may know how to prize and enjoy it. Remember, too, that
you are not to be so selfish as to think nothing of contributing to the
happiness of others. It is blessed to _give_ as well as to _receive_.

When you are in the company of ladies, beware of silliness. It is true
that they will sooner forgive foolishness than ill manners, but you
will, of course, avoid both. I know one young gentleman of great
promise, who adopted the opinion that in order to qualify himself for
female society, he had only to become as foolish as possible, while in
their presence. That young man soon lost the favor of all whose
friendship might have operated as a restraint; but unwilling to
associate with the despicable, and unable to live in absolute solitude,
he chose the bottle for his companion; and made himself, and the few
friends he had, miserable.

Nothing, unless it be the coarsest flattery, will give more offence, in
the end, than to treat ladies as mere playthings or children. On the
other hand, do not become pedantic, and lecture them on difficult
subjects. They readily see through all this. Neither is it good manners
or policy to talk much of yourself. They can penetrate this also; and
they despise the vanity which produces it. In detecting deception, they
are often much quicker than we apprehend.

A young gentleman, in one of the New England States, who had assumed
the chair of the pedagogue, paid his addresses to the beautiful and
sensible daughter of a respectable farmer. One day, as she was present
in his school, he read to her a hymn, which he said was from his own
pen. Now it was obvious to this lady, and even to some of the pupils,
that the hymn was none other than that usually known by the name of the
'Harvest Hymn,' modified by the change of a few words only. How much
effect this circumstance might have had I cannot say with certainty;
but I know it disgusted _one_, at least, of the pupils; and I know,
too, that his addresses to the lady were soon afterwards discontinued.

A young man who would profit from the society of young ladies, or
indeed from any society, must preserve a modest and respectful spirit;
must seek to conciliate their good will by quiet and unostentatious
attentions, and discover more willingness to avail himself of their
stock of information, than to display his own knowledge or abilities.

He should observe, and learn to admire, that purity and ignorance of
evil, which is the characteristic of well-educated young ladies, and
which, while we are near them, raises us above those sordid and sensual
considerations which hold such sway over _men_, in their intercourse
with each other. He should treat them as spirits of a purer sphere, and
try to be as innocent, if not as ignorant of evil as they are;
remembering that there is no better way of raising himself in the scale
of intellectual and moral being. But to whatever degree of intimacy he
may arrive, he should never forget those little acts of courtesy and
kindness, as well as that respect, and self-denial, which lend a charm
to every kind of polite intercourse, and especially to that of which I
am now speaking.

Whenever an opportunity occurs, however, it is the duty of a young man
to introduce topics of conversation which are decidedly favorable to
mental and moral improvement. Should he happen to be attending to the
same study, or reading the same book with a female acquaintance, an
excellent opportunity will be afforded for putting this rule in
practice.



