
CHAPTER VI.

Marriage.


SECTION I. _Why Matrimony is a Duty._

Matrimony is a subject of high importance and interest. It is
_important_, because it was among the earliest institutions of the
great Creator; because it has always existed in some form or other, and
must continue to exist, or society cannot be sustained; and because in
proportion as the ends of the Creator are answered by its
establishment, just in the same proportion does the happiness of
society rise or fall. It points out the condition of society in this
respect as accurately as a thermometer shows the temperature of the
surrounding atmosphere. I might even go farther, and say, that in
proportion as the original and real ends of marriage are answered, do
the interests of religion also rise or sink.[11]

This institution is peculiarly interesting from the fact that it
involves so many items of human happiness. We often speak of the value
of _friendship_. What friendship like that which results from a happy
union of the sexes? We talk of _education_. What school so favorable to
improvement as the domestic circle may be rendered? Whether we consider
education in a physical, mental or moral point of view, all its plans
are imperfect without this. No man or woman is, as a general rule,
fully prepared for the humblest sphere of action on earth, without the
advantages which are peculiar to this institution. Nor has any man done
his whole duty to God, who has left this subject out of consideration.

It has sometimes been said, and with much truth, that 'no unmarried
person was ever thoroughly and completely educated.' It appears to me
that were we to consider the intellectual and physical departments of
education, merely, this would be true; but how much more so when we
take in morals? Parents,--teachers,--what are they? Their labors are
indeed of infinite value, in themselves considered; but it is only in a
state of matrimony, it is only when we are called to the discharge of
those multiplied duties which are involved in the endearing relations
of husband, wife, parent and guardian, that our characters are fully
tested and established. Late in life as these relations commence, the
circumstances which they involve are so peculiar that they modify the
character of the parties much more than has usually been considered.

I am fond, therefore, of contemplating the married state as a
school;--not merely for a short term, but for _life_;--not one whose
teachers are liable to be changed once or twice a year to the great
disadvantage of all who are concerned, but whose instructors are as
permanent as the school itself. It is true, that like other schools, it
may result in the formation of bad character; but in proportion to its
power to accomplish either good or bad results, will be its value, if
wisely improved.

It is not to be denied that this view of the subject is in favor of
_early_ marriage. And I can truly say, indeed, that every thing
considered, early marriage does appear to me highly desirable. And it
would require stronger arguments than any which I have yet seen
adduced, even by some of our political economists, to make me surrender
this opinion.

The only serious objection, of a popular kind, to early marriage,
arises from the difficulty of supporting a family. But the parties
themselves must be supported at all events, whether married or single.
'But the consequences'--And what are the consequences? An _earlier_
family, indeed; but not of necessity a larger. I believe that facts
will bear me out in stating that the sum total of the progeny of every
thousand families who commence at from twenty-five to thirty, is as
great as that of one thousand who begin at from twenty to twenty-five.
I have even seen pretty large families where the eldest was thirty-five
years younger than both the parents; and one or two instances of
numerous families where marriage did not take place till the age of
forty. Physiologists have long observed this singular fact, and it has
sometimes been explained by saying, if indeed it be an explanation,
that Nature, in these cases, unwilling to be cheated out of her rights,
endeavors to make up in energy and activity what has been lost in time.

The question, however, will recur, whether families, though equally
large, cannot be better maintained when marriage is deferred to a later
period. And it certainly is a question of immense importance; For
nothing is more painful than to see large families, whose parents,
whether young or more advanced, have not the means of educating them
properly. It is also not a little painful to find instances of poverty
so extreme that there is absolute suffering, for want of food and
clothing.

But the question must be determined by facts. And it would be greatly
aiding the cause of humanity if extensive comparisons were made between
the pecuniary condition of those who marry early and those who defer
the subject to a later period. But from my own limited observation I am
fully of opinion that the result of the comparison would be greatly in
favor of early marriages. Should this prove to be true, the position
which I have assumed is, I think, established; for it appears to me
that no other argument for delay has any claim to our notice.

On the other hand, the following, among other evils, are the results of
deferring marriage.

1. The temper and habits of the parties become stiff and unyielding
when advanced in life, and they learn to adapt themselves to each other
with difficulty. In the view which I have taken above they become
miserable as teachers, and still more miserable as scholars.

2. Youth are thus exposed to the danger of forming habits of criminal
indulgence, as fatal to the health and the character, as they are
ruinous to the soul.

3. Or if they proceed not so far, they at least acquire the habit of
spending time in vain or pernicious amusements. All mankind must and
will seek for gratifications of some sort or other. And aside from
religious principle, there is no certain security against those
amusements and indulgences which are pernicious and destructive, but
early and virtuous attachments, and the pleasures afforded by domestic
life. He can never want for amusement or rational gratification who is
surrounded by a rising family for whom he has a genuine affection.

4. Long continued celibacy _contracts_ the mind, if it does not
enfeeble it. For one openhearted liberal old bachelor, you will find
ten who are parsimonious, avaricious, cold-hearted, and too often
destitute of those sympathies for their fellow beings which the married
life has a tendency to elicit and perpetuate.[12]

5. Franklin says that late marriages are attended with another
inconvenience, viz.; that the chance of living to see our children
educated, is greatly diminished.

6. But I go much farther than I have hitherto done, and insist that
other things being equal, the young married man has the advantage in a
_pecuniary_ point of view. This is a natural result from the fact that
he is compelled to acquire habits of industry, frugality, and economy;
and is under less temptation to waste his time in trifling or
pernicious amusements. But I may appeal to facts, even here. Look
around you in the world, and see if out of a given number of single
persons, say one thousand, of the age of thirty-five, there be not a
greater number in poverty, than of the same number who settled in life
at twenty.

Perhaps I ought barely to notice another objection to these views. It
is said that neither the mind nor the body come to full maturity so
early as we are apt to suppose. But is complete maturity of body or
mind indispensable? I am not advocating the practice of marrying in
childhood. It takes sometime for the affections toward an individual to
ripen and become settled. This is a matter involving too high
responsibilities to justify haste. The consequences, speaking
generally, are not confined to this life; they extend to eternity.

      [11] Some of the topics of this section have been anticipated, in
      part, in a previous chapter; but their importance entitles them
      to a farther consideration.

      [12] I know this principle is sometimes disputed. A late English
      writer, in a Treatise on Happiness, at page 251 of Vol. II,
      maintains the contrary. He quotes from Lord Bacon, that
      'Unmarried men are the best friends, best masters, and best
      servants,' and that 'The best _works_, and of greatest merit for
      the public, have proceeded from unmarried or childless men.' He
      also introduces Jeremy Taylor, as saying that 'Celibacy, like a
      fly in the heart of an apple, dwells in perpetual sweetness.'

      In commenting upon these remarks, this writer says, 'One half of
      the most eminent persons that have ever lived in the world of
      science and literature, have remained unmarried,' and 'in the
      connubial state, too frequently, the sympathies are connected
      within the family circle, while there is little generosity or
      philanthropy beyond.' And lastly, that 'Unmarried men possess
      many natural excellences, which if not engrossed by a family will
      be directed towards their fellow creatures.'

      Now it is admitted that many eminent men, especially in science
      and literature, have been bachelors; and that among them were
      Newton and Locke. But this only proves that while thousands and
      tens of thousands of their fellow beings spent their lives in
      insignificance, for want of a definite object to live for, these
      men, having an _object_ before them, _accomplished_ something.
      And if you could induce _one_ single man in a _thousand_, nay,
      one in ten thousand, to make a similar use of his exemption from
      the cares of a family, much might be expected from celibacy; or
      at least, the results of their labors might be a partial
      compensation to society for the evil tendency of their example.
      For marriage cannot be denied to be an institution of God, and
      indispensable to the existence of society. And who can say that
      he has purchased an indulgence to disobey a law which is in some
      respects paramount to every other, however great the price he may
      have paid?

      That marriage tends to concentrate our sympathies within the
      family circle, I do not believe. A proper investigation of the
      subject will, I am certain, prove this assumption unfounded.
      Facts do _not_ show unmarried men to be 'best friends, masters,
      servants' &c.; and I am sorry to find such a _theory_ maintained
      by any sensible writer. Some of the illustrious examples of
      celibacy which are usually brought, were by no means estimable
      for their social feelings or habits. What would become of
      mankind, if they were all to immure themselves in dungeons, or
      what is nearly the same thing to social life, among books and
      papers? Better, by far, to remain in ignorance of the material
      laws which govern the universe, than to become recluses in a
      world like this. Better even dispense with some of the lights
      which genius has struck out to enable us to read suns and stars,
      than to understand attraction in the material world, while we are
      insensible to all attractions of a moral and social kind. God has
      made us to _feel_, to _sympathize_, and to _love_,--as well as to
      _know_.


SECTION II. _General Considerations._

We are now to enter on a most important part of our subject. Hitherto
it had been my object to point out the proper course for you to pursue
in reference to yourself, your own improvement, and consequent
usefulness. In the remarks of the preceding chapter, and in those which
follow, you are regarded as seeking a _companion_; as anxious to assume
new relations, such as involve new duties and new responsibilities.

If you are successful, instead of educating yourself alone, you are to
be concerned in improving the mental, moral, and social condition of
two persons; and in the end, perhaps _others_. You are to be a
_teacher_; you cannot avoid this station if you would. But you are also
to be a _learner_. Dr. Rush says we naturally imitate the manners, and
gradually acquire the tempers of persons with whom we live, provided
they are objects of our affection and respect. 'This,' he adds, 'has
been observed in husbands and wives who have lived long and happily
together; and even in servants.' And nothing can be more true.

Not only your temper and that of your companion, but your whole
character, considered as physical, mental, and moral beings, will be
mutually improved or injured through life. You will be placed, as I
have already intimated, at a school of mutual instruction, which is to
continue without vacation or change of monitors,--perhaps half a
century;--during every one of the earliest years of which, your
character will be more really and more permanently modified than in the
same amount of time at any prior period of your education, unless it
were in the veriest infancy.

Surely then it is no light affair to make preparation for a school like
this. There is no period in the life of a young man so important; for
there is none on which his happiness and the happiness of others so
essentially depend.

Before I advert to the particular qualifications which it is necessary
for you to seek in so intimate a friend, I shall mention a few
considerations of a general nature.

Settle it, in the first place, that absolute perfection is not to be
found. There are not a few young men of a romantic turn of mind,
fostered and increased by reading the fictitious writings of the day,
who have pictured to themselves for companions in life unreal forms and
angelic characters, instead of beings who dwell in 'houses of clay,'
and are 'crushed before the moth.' Such 'exalted imaginations' must
sooner or later be brought down: happy will it be with those who are
chastened in due season.

In the second place, resolve never to be misled by any adventitious
circumstances. Wealth, beauty, rank, friends, &c, are all proper
considerations, but they are not of the _first_ importance. They are
merely secondary qualifications. Marriage must never be a matter of
bargain and sale; for

In the third place, no marriage engagement should ever be thought of
unless there is first a genuine and rational attachment. No cold
calculations of profit or loss, no hereditary estates or other
adventitious circumstances, though they were equivalent to a peerage,
or a realm, should ever, for one moment, even in thought, be
substituted for love. It is treason to Him who ordained this most
blessed institution.

But fourthly, though wealth, however valuable in itself, is by no means
a recommendation in the present case, yet the means of a comfortable
support are certainly to be regarded. It is painful to see a very young
couple, with a large family, and destitute of the means of support.

In the fifth place, a _suitable age_ is desirable.

When we consider the varying tastes, habits and feelings of the same
person at different periods of his life, is it not at once obvious
that, other things being equal, those persons are most likely to find
that happiness which is sought in matrimony, by associating with those
whose age does not differ greatly from their own? It is true, some of
the happiest human connexions that ever were formed were between
persons of widely differing ages; but is this the general rule? Would
not those who have found happiness under other circumstances, have been
_still happier_, had their ages been more nearly equal?

There is little doubt that a person advanced in life may lengthen his
days by a connection with a person much younger than himself. Whether
the life of the other party is not shortened, in an equal degree, at
the same time, and by the same means, remains to be determined; but
probably it is so.

Some men and women are as old, in reality, whatever their _years_ may
indicate, at twenty, as others at twenty-five. The matrimonial
connection then may be safely formed between parties whose ages differ
a few years; but I think that as a general rule, the ages of the
parties ought to be nearly equal.

Lastly, it was believed by a great observer of human nature, the late
Dr. Spurzheim, that no person was fit for the domestic relations who
had not undergone trials and sufferings. The gay reader may smile at
this opinion, but I can assure him that many wise men besides Spurzheim
have entertained it. Chateaubriand, among others, in his 'Genius of
Christianity,' advances the same opinion. Some, as we have seen, hold
that no person can be well educated without suffering. Such persons,
however, use the term education as meaning something more than a little
scientific instruction;--as a means of forming _character_. In this
point of view no sentiment can be more true. Even the Bible confirms
it, when it assures us, that the 'Captain of our Salvation was made
perfect through sufferings.'


SECTION III. _Female Qualifications for Marriage._

1. MORAL EXCELLENCE.

The highest as well as noblest trait in female character, is love to
God. When we consider what are the tendencies of Christianity to
elevate woman from the state of degradation to which she had, for ages,
been subjected--when we consider not only what it has done, but what it
is destined yet to do for her advancement,--it is impossible not to
shrink from the presence of an impious, and above all an unprincipled
atheistical female, as from an ungrateful and unnatural being.

Man is under eternal obligations to Christianity and its Divine Author,
undoubtedly; but woman seems to be more so.

That charge against females which in the minds of some half atheistical
men is magnified into a stigma on Christianity itself, namely that they
are more apt to become religious than men; and that we find by far the
greater part of professing Christians to be females, is in my own view
one of the highest praises of the sex. I rejoice that their hearts are
more susceptible than ours, and that they do not war so strongly
against that religion which their nature demands. I have met with but
one female, whom I knew to be an avowed atheist.

Indeed there are very few men to be found, who are skeptical
themselves, who do not prefer pious companions of the other sex. I will
not stop to adduce this as an evidence of the truth of our religion
itself, and of its adaptation to the wants of the human race, for
happily it does not need it. Christianity is based on the most abundant
evidence, of a character wholly unquestionable. But this I do and will
say, that to be consistent, young men of loose principles ought not to
rail at females for their piety, and then whenever they seek for a
constant friend, one whom they can love,--for they never really love
the abandoned--always prefer, other things being equal, the society of
the pious and the virtuous.

2. COMMON SENSE.

Next on the list of particular qualifications in a female, for
matrimonial life, I place COMMON SENSE. In the view of some, it ought
to precede moral excellence. A person, it is said, who is deficient in
common sense, is, in proportion to the imbecility, unfit for _social_
life, and yet the same person might possess a kind of negative
excellency, or perhaps even a species of piety. This view appears to
me, however, much more specious than sound.

By _common sense_, as used in this place, I mean the faculty by means
of which we see things _as they_ really are. It implies judgment and
discrimination, and a proper sense of propriety in regard to the common
concerns of life. It leads us to form judicious plans of action, and to
be governed by our circumstances in such a way as will be generally
approved. It is the exercise of reason, uninfluenced by passion or
prejudice. To man, it is nearly what instinct is to brutes. It is very
different from genius or talent, as they are commonly defined; but much
better than either. It never blazes forth with the splendor of noon,
but shines with a constant and useful light. To the housewife--but,
above all, to the mother,--it is indispensable.

3. DESIRE FOR IMPROVEMENT.

Whatever other recommendations a lady may possess, she should have an
inextinguishable thirst for improvement. No sensible person can be
truly happy in the world, without this; much less qualified to make
others happy. But the genuine spirit of improvement, wherever it
exists, atones for the absence of many qualities which would otherwise
be indispensable: in this respect resembling that 'charity' which
covers 'a multitude of sins.' Without it, almost everything would be of
little consequence,--with it, every thing else is rendered doubly
valuable.

One would think that every sensible person, of either sex, would aspire
at improvement, were it merely to avoid the shame of being stationary
like the brutes. Above all, it is most surprising that any lady should
be satisfied to pass a day or even an hour without mental and moral
progress. It is no discredit to the lower animals that--'their little
all flows in at once,' that 'in ages they no more can know, or covet or
enjoy,' for this is the legitimate result of the physical constitution
which God has given them. But it is far otherwise with the masters and
mistresses of creation; for

    'Were man to live coeval with the sun,
    The patriarch pupil _should_ be learning still,
    And dying, leave his lessons half unlearnt.'

There are,--I am sorry to say it--not a few of both sexes who never
appear to breathe out one hearty desire to rise, intellectually or
morally, with a view to the government of themselves or others. They
love themselves supremely--their friends subordinately--their
neighbors, perhaps not at all. But neither the love they bear to
themselves or others ever leads them to a single series of any sort of
action which has for its ultimate object the improvement of any thing
higher than the condition of the mere animal. Dress, personal
appearance, equipage, style of a dwelling or its furniture, with no
other view, however, than the promotion of mere physical enjoyment, is
the height of their desires for improvement!

Talk to them of elevating the intellect or improving the heart, and
they admit it is true; but they go their way and pursue their
accustomed round of folly again. The probability is, that though they
assent to your views, they do not understand you. It requires a stretch
of charity to which I am wholly unequal, to believe that beings who
ever conceived, for one short moment, of the height to which their
natures may be elevated, should sink back without a single struggle, to
a mere selfish, unsocial, animal life;--to lying in bed ten or twelve
hours daily, rising three or four hours later than the sun, spending
the morning in preparation at the glass, the remainder of the time till
dinner in unmeaning calls, the afternoon in yawning over a novel, and
the evening in the excitement of the tea table and the party, and the
ball room, to retire, perhaps at midnight, with the mind and body and
soul in a feverish state, to toss away the night in vapid or
distressing dreams.

How beings endowed with immortal souls can be contented to while away
precious hours in a manner so useless, and withal so displeasing to the
God who gave them their time for the improvement of themselves and
others, is to me absolutely inconceivable! Yet it is certainly done;
and that not merely by a few solitary individuals scattered up and down
the land; but in some of our most populous cities, by considerable
numbers.

A philanthropic individual not long since undertook with the aid of
others, to establish a weekly or semi-weekly gazette in one of our
cities, for almost the sole purpose, as I have since learned, of
rousing the drones among her sex to benevolent action in some form or
other, in behalf of members of their families, their friends or their
neighbors. She hoped, at first, to save them from many hours of ennui
by the perusal of her columns; and that their _minds_ being opened to
instruction, and their _hearts_ made to vibrate in sympathy with the
cries of ignorance, poverty, or absolute distress, their _hands_ might
be roused to action. But alas, the articles in the paper were _too
long_, or _too dry_. They could not task their minds to go through with
an argument.

Should the young man who is seeking an 'help meet,' chance to fall in
with such _beings_ as these--and some we fear there are in almost every
part of our land,--let him shun them as he would the 'choke damp' of
the cavern.

Their society would extinguish, rather than fan the flame of every
generous or benevolent feeling that might be kindling in his bosom.
_With_ the fond, the ardent, the never failing desire to improve,
physically, intellectually, and morally, there are few females who may
not make tolerable companions for a man of sense;--_without_ it, though
a young lady were beautiful and otherwise lovely beyond comparison,
wealthy as the Indies, surrounded by thousands of the most worthy
friends, and even talented, let him beware! Better remain in celibacy a
thousand years (could life last so long) great as the evil may be, than
form a union with such an object. He should pity, and seek her
reformation, if not beyond the bounds of possibility; but love her he
should not! The penalty will be absolutely insupportable.

One point ought to be settled,--I think unalterably settled--before
matrimony. It ought indeed so be settled in early life, but it is
better late, perhaps, than never. Each of the parties should consider
themselves as sacredly pledged, in all cases, to yield to conviction. I
have no good opinion of the man who expects his wife to yield her
opinion to his, on every occasion, unless she is convinced. I say on
_every occasion_; for that she sometimes ought to do so, seems to be
both scriptural and rational. It would be very inconvenient to call in
a third person as an umpire upon every slight difference of opinion
between a young couple, besides being very humiliating. But if each
maintain, with pertinacity, their opinion, what can be done? It does
seem to me that every sensible woman, who feels any good degree of
confidence in her husband, will perceive the propriety of yielding her
opinion to his in such cases, where the matter is of such a nature that
it cannot be delayed.

But there are a thousand things occurring, in which there is no
necessity of forming an immediate opinion, or decision, except from
conviction. I should never like the idea of a woman's conforming to her
husband's views to please him, merely, without considering whether they
are correct or not. It seems to me a sort of treason against the God
who gave her a mind of her own, with an intention that she should use
it. But it would be higher treason still, in male, or female, not to
yield, when actually convinced.

4. FONDNESS FOR CHILDREN.

Few traits of female character are more important than this. Yet there
is much reason to believe that, even in contemplating an engagement
that is expected to last for life, it is almost universally overlooked.
Without it, though a woman should possess every accomplishment of
person, mind, and manners, she would be poor indeed; and would probably
render those around her miserable. I speak now generally. There may be
exceptions to this, as to other general rules. A dislike of children,
even in men, is an unfavorable omen; in woman it is insupportable; for
it is grossly unnatural. To a susceptible, intelligent, virtuous mind,
I can scarcely conceive of a worse situation in this world or any
other, than to be chained for life to a person who hates children. You
can purchase, if you have the pecuniary means, almost every thing but
_maternal love_. This no gold can buy. Wo to the female who is doomed
to drag out a miserable existence with a husband who 'can't bear
children;' but thrice miserable is the doom of him who has a wife and a
family of children, but whose children have no _mother_! If there be
orphans any where in the wide world, they are these.[13]

The more I reflect on the four last mentioned traits of female
character, the more they rise in my estimation, eclipsing all others;
unless perhaps, a good temper.

It is said that after every precaution, the choice of a wife is like
buying a ticket in a lottery. If we were absolutely deaf and blind in
the selection, and were so from necessity, the maxim might be just. But
this is not so. We shut our eyes and stop our ears voluntarily, and
then complain of the imperfection of our means of forming a judgment.
In truth we impeach the goodness of Him who was the author of the
_institution_.

No young man is worthy of a wife who has not sense enough to determine,
even after a few interviews, what the bent of a lady's mind
is;--whether she listens with most pleasure to conversation which is
wholly unimproving, or whether she gladly turns from it, when an
opportunity offers, to subjects which are above the petty chit-chat or
common but fashionable scandal of the day; and above all, avoids
_retailing_ it. He knows, or _may_ know, without a 'seven years'
acquaintance, whether she spends a part of her leisure time in reading,
or whether the whole is spent in dressing, visiting, or conversing
about plays, actors, theatres, &c. And if she reads a part of the time,
the fault must be his own, if he does not know whether she relishes any
thing but the latest novel, or the most light--not to say
empty--periodical. Let it be remembered, then, by every young man that
the fault is his own, if he do not give himself time, before he forms
an engagement that is to last for life, to ascertain whether his
friendship is to be formed with a person who is desirous of
improvement, or with one who, living only for pleasure, is 'dead while
she liveth.'

You will say it is difficult to ascertain whether she is fond of
children or not. But I doubt it. Has she then no young brothers, or
sisters, or cousins? Are there no children in the neighborhood? For if
there are,--if there is but one, and she sees that individual but once
a week,--the fact may easily be ascertained. If she loves that child,
the child will love her; and its eye will brighten when it sees her, or
hears her name mentioned. Children seldom fail to keep debt and credit
in these matters, and they know how to balance the account, with great
ingenuity.

These remarks are made, not in the belief that they will benefit those
who are already blinded by fancy or passion, but with the hope that
some more fortunate reader may reflect on the probable chances of
happiness or misery, and pause before he leaps into the vortex of
matrimonial discord. No home can ever be a happy one to any of its
inmates, where there is no maternal love, nor any desire for mental or
moral improvement. But where these exist, in any considerable degree,
and the original attachment was founded on correct principles, there is
always hope of brighter days, even though clouds at present obscure the
horizon. No woman who loves her husband, and desires to make continual
improvement, will long consent to render those around her unhappy.

      [13] It is worthy of remark, as a well established fact, that the
      Chinese have an _Isan-mon_ or _mother_, to their silkworms! Her
      duty is, not to attend to the eggs and the hatching, for nature
      has made provision for that; but to take possession of the
      chamber where the young are deposited; to see that it be free
      from 'noisome smells, and all noises;' to attend to its
      temperature, and to 'avoid making a smoke, or raising a dust.'
      She must not enter the room till she is perfectly clean in person
      and dress, and must be clothed in a very plain habit; and in
      order to be more sensible to the temperature of the place, her
      dress must contain no lining.

      Now although every mother of children does not have the care
      of silkworms, yet she has the care of beings who are in some
      respects equally susceptible. And I trust no person who knows the
      importance of temperature, ventilation, &c. especially to the
      tender infant, will be ashamed to derive an important lesson from
      the foregoing.

5. LOVE OF DOMESTIC CONCERNS.

Without the knowledge and the love of domestic concerns, even the wife
of a peer, is but a poor affair. It was the fashion, in former times,
for ladies to understand a great deal about these things, and it would
be very hard to make me believe that it did not tend to promote the
interests and honor of their husbands.

The concerns of a great family never can be _well_ managed, if left
_wholly_ to hirelings; and there are many parts of these affairs in
which it would be unseemly for husbands to meddle. Surely, no lady can
be too high in rank to make it proper for her to be well acquainted
with the character and general demeanor of all the female servants. To
receive and give character is too much to be left to a servant, however
good, whose service has been ever so long, or acceptable.

Much of the ease and happiness of the great and rich must depend on the
character of those by whom they are assisted. They live under the same
roof with them; they are frequently the children of their tenants, or
poorer neighbors; the conduct of their whole lives must be influenced
by the examples and precepts which they here imbibe; and when ladies
consider how much more weight there must be in one word from them, than
in ten thousand words from a person who, call her what you like, is
still a _fellow servant_, it does appear strange that they should
forego the performance of this at once important and pleasing part of
their duty.

I am, however, addressing myself, in this work, to persons in the
middle ranks of life; and here a knowledge of domestic affairs is so
necessary in every wife, that the lover ought to have it continually in
his eye. Not only a knowledge of these affairs--not only to know how
things _ought to be done_, but how to _do them_; not only to know what
ingredients ought to be put into a pie or a pudding, but to be able _to
make_ the pie or the pudding.

Young people, when they come together, ought not, unless they have
fortunes, or are to do unusual business, to think about _servants_!
Servants for what! To help them eat, and drink, and sleep? When they
have children, there must be some _help_ in a farmer's or tradesman's
house, but until then, what call is there for a servant in a house, the
master of which has to _earn_ every mouthful that is consumed?

Eating and drinking come _three times every day_; they must come; and,
however little we may, in the days of our health and vigor, care about
choice food and about cookery, we very soon get _tired_ of heavy or
burnt bread, and of spoiled joints of meat. We bear them for once or
twice perhaps; but about the third time, we begin to lament; about the
fifth time, it must be an extraordinary affair that will keep us from
complaining; if the like continue for a month or two, we begin to
_repent_; and then adieu to all our anticipated delights. We discover,
when it is too late, that we have not got a helpmate, but a burden;
and, the fire of love being damped, the unfortunately educated
creature, whose parents are more to blame than she is, unless she
resolve to learn her duty, is doomed to lead a life very nearly
approaching to that of misery; for, however considerate the husband, he
never can esteem her as he would have done, had she been skilled in
domestic affairs.

The mere _manual_ performance of domestic labors is not, indeed,
absolutely necessary in the female head of the family of professional
men; but, even here, and also in the case of great merchants and of
gentlemen living on their fortunes, surely the head of the household
ought to be able to give directions as to the purchasing of meal,
salting meat, making bread, making preserves of all sorts; and ought to
see the things done.

The lady ought to take care that food be well cooked; that there be
always a sufficient supply; that there be good living without waste;
and that in her department, nothing shall be seen inconsistent with the
rank, station, and character of her husband. If he have a skilful and
industrious wife, he will, unless he be of a singularly foolish turn,
gladly leave all these things to her absolute dominion, controlled only
by the extent of the whole expenditure, of which he must be the best
judge.

But, in a farmer's or a tradesman's family, the manual performance is
absolutely necessary, whether there be domestics or not. No one knows
how to teach another so well as one who has done, and can do, the thing
himself. It was said of a famous French commander, that, in attacking
an enemy, he did not say to his men '_go_ on,' but '_come_ on;' and,
whoever has well observed the movements of domestics, must know what a
prodigious difference there is in the effect of the words, _go_ and
_come_.

A very good rule would be, to have nothing to eat, in a farmer's or
mechanic's house, that the mistress did not know how to prepare and to
cook; no pudding, tart, pie or cake, that she did not know how to make.
Never fear the toil to her: exercise is good for health; and without
health there is no beauty. Besides, what is the labor in such a case?
And how many thousands of ladies, who idle away the day, would give
half their fortunes for that sound sleep which the stirring housewife
seldom fails to enjoy.

Yet, if a young farmer or mechanic _marry_ a girl, who has been brought
up only to '_play music_;' to _draw_, to _sing_, to waste paper, pen
and ink in writing long and half romantic letters, and to see shows,
and plays, and read novels;--if a young man do marry such an
unfortunate young creature, let him bear the consequences with temper.
Let him be _just_. Justice will teach him to treat her with great
indulgence; to endeavor to persuade her to learn her business as a
wife; to be patient with her; to reflect that he has taken her, being
apprized of her inability; to bear in mind, that he was, or seemed to
be, pleased with her showy and useless acquirements; and that, when the
gratification of his passion has been accomplished, he is unjust, and
cruel, and unmanly, if he turn round upon her, and accuse her of a want
of that knowledge, which he well knew, beforehand, she did not possess.

For my part, I do not know, nor can I form an idea of, a more
unfortunate being than a girl with a mere boarding school education,
and without a fortune to enable her to keep domestics, when married. Of
what _use_ are _her_ accomplishments? Of what use her music, her
drawing, and her romantic epistles? If she should chance to possess a
sweet disposition, and good nature, the first faint cry of her first
babe drives all the tunes and all the landscapes, and all the imaginary
beings out of her head for ever.

The farmer or the tradesman's wife has to _help earn_ a provision for
her children; or, at the least, to help to earn a store for sickness or
old age. She ought, therefore, to be qualified to begin, at once, to
assist her husband in his earnings. The way in which she can most
efficiently assist, is by taking care of his property; by expending his
money to the greatest advantage; by wasting nothing, but by making the
table sufficiently abundant with the least expense.

But how is she to do these things, unless she has been _brought up_ to
understand domestic affairs? How is she to do these things, if she has
been taught to think these matters beneath her study? How is the man to
expect her to do these things, if she has been so bred, as to make her
habitually look upon them as worthy the attention of none but low and
ignorant women?

_Ignorant_, indeed! Ignorance consists in a want of knowledge of those
things which your calling or state of life naturally supposes you to
understand. A ploughman is not an ignorant man because he does not know
how to read. If he knows how to plough, he is not to be called an
ignorant man; but a wife may be justly called an ignorant woman, if she
does not know how to provide a dinner for her husband. It is cold
comfort for a hungry man, to tell him how delightfully his wife plays
and sings. _Lovers_ may live on very aerial diet, but husbands stand in
need of something more solid; and young women may take my word for it,
that a constantly clean table, well cooked victuals, a house in order,
and a cheerful fire, will do more towards preserving a husband's heart,
than all the 'accomplishments' taught in all the 'establishments' in
the world without them.

6. SOBRIETY.

Surely no reasonable young man will expect sobriety in a companion,
when he does not possess this qualification himself. But by _sobriety_,
I do not mean a habit which is opposed to _intoxication_, for if that
be hateful in a man, what must it be in a woman? Besides, it does seem
to me that no young man, with his eyes open, and his other senses
perfect, needs any caution on that point. Drunkenness, downright
drunkenness, is usually as incompatible with _purity_, as it is with
_decency_.

Much is sometimes said in favor of a little wine or other fermented
liquors, especially at dinner. No young lady, in health, needs any of
these stimulants. Wine, or ale, or cider, at dinner! I would as soon
take a companion from the _streets_, as one who must habitually have
her glass or two of wine at dinner. And this is not an opinion formed
prematurely or hastily.

But by the word SOBRIETY in a young woman, I mean a great deal more
than even a rigid abstinence from a love of drink, which I do not
believe to exist to any considerable degree, in this country, even in
the least refined parts of it. I mean a great deal _more_ than this; I
mean sobriety of conduct. The word _sober_ and its derivatives mean
_steadiness_, _seriousness_, _carefulness_, _scrupulous propriety of
conduct_.

Now this kind of sobriety is of great importance in the person with
whom we are to live constantly. Skipping, romping, rattling girls are
very amusing where all consequences are out of the question, and they
may, perhaps, ultimately become _sober_. But while you have no
certainty of this, there is a presumptive argument on the other side.
To be sure, when girls are mere children, they are expected to play and
romp _like_ children. But when they are arrived at an age which turns
their thoughts towards a situation for life; when they begin to think
of having the command of a house, however small or poor, it is time for
them to cast away, not the cheerfulness or the simplicity, but the
_levity_ of the child.

'If I could not have found a young woman,' says a certain writer, 'who
I was not sure possessed _all_ the qualities expressed by that word
_sobriety_, I should have remained a bachelor to the end of life.
Scores of gentlemen have, at different times, expressed to me their
surprise that I was "_always in spirits_; that nothing _pulled me
down_;" and the truth is, that throughout nearly forty years of
troubles, losses, and crosses, assailed all the while by numerous and
powerful enemies, and performing, at the same time, greater mental
labors than man ever before performed; all those labors requiring
mental exertion, and some of them mental exertion of the highest order,
I have never known a single hour of _real anxiety_; the troubles have
been no troubles to me; I have not known what _lowness of spirits_
meant; and have been more gay, and felt less care than any bachelor
that ever lived. "You are always in spirits!" To be sure, for why
should I not be so? Poverty, I have always set at defiance, and I
could, therefore, defy the temptations to riches; and as to _home_ and
_children_, I had taken care to provide myself with an inexhaustible
store of that "sobriety" which I so strongly recommend to others.

'This sobriety is a title to trustworthiness; and this, young man, is
the treasure that you ought to prize above all others. Miserable is the
husband who, when he crosses the threshold of his house, carries with
him doubts, and fears, and suspicions. I do not mean suspicions of the
_fidelity_ of his wife; but of her care, frugality, attention to his
interests, and to the health and morals of his children. Miserable is
the man who cannot leave all unlocked; and who is not _sure_, quite
_certain_, that all is as safe as if grasped in his own hand.

'He is the happy husband who can go away at a moment's warning, leaving
his house and family with as little anxiety as he quits an inn, no more
fearing to find, on his return, any thing wrong, than he would fear a
discontinuance of the rising and setting of the sun; and if, as in my
case, leaving books and papers all lying about at sixes and sevens,
finding them arranged in proper order, and the room, during the lucky
interval, freed from the effects of his and his ploughman's or
gardener's dirty shoes. Such a man has no _real cares--no troubles_;
and this is the sort of life I have led. I have had all the numerous
and indescribable delights of home and children, and at the same time,
all the bachelor's freedom from domestic cares.

'But in order to possess this precious _trustworthiness_, you must, if
you can, exercise your _reason_ in the choice of your partner. If she
be vain of her person, very fond of dress, fond of _flattery_ at all,
given to gadding about, fond of what are called _parties of pleasure_,
or _coquetish_, though in the least degree,--she will never be
trustworthy; she cannot change her nature; and if you marry her, you
will be unjust, if you expect trustworthiness at her hands. But on the
other hand, if you find in her that innate _sobriety_ of which I have
been speaking, there is required on your part, and that at once, too,
confidence and trust without any limit. Confidence in this case is
nothing, unless it be reciprocal. To have a trustworthy wife, you must
begin by showing her, even before marriage, that you have no
suspicions, fears, or doubts in regard to her. Many a man has been
discarded by a virtuous girl, merely on account of his querulous
conduct. All women despise jealous men, and if they marry them, their
motive is other than that of affection.'

There is a tendency, in our very natures, to become what we are taken
to be. Beware then of suspicion or jealousy, lest you produce the very
thing which you most dread. The evil results of suspicion and jealousy
whether in single or married, public or private life, may be seen by
the following fact.

A certain professional gentleman had the misfortune to possess a
suspicious temper. He had not a better friend on the earth than Mr. C.,
yet by some unaccountable whim or other, he began of a sudden to
suspect he was his enemy;--and what was at first at the farthest
possible remove from the truth, ultimately grew to be a reality. Had it
not have been for his jealousy, Mr. C. might have been to this hour one
of the doctor's warmest and most confidential friends, instead of being
removed--and in a great measure through _his_ influence--from a useful
field of labor.

'Let any man observe as I frequently have,' says the writer last
quoted, 'with delight, the excessive fondness of the laboring people
for their children. Let him observe with what care they dress them out
on Sundays with means deducted from their own scanty meals. Let him
observe the husband, who has toiled, like his horse, all the week,
nursing the babe, while the wife is preparing dinner. Let him observe
them both abstaining from a sufficiency, lest the children should feel
the pinchings of hunger. Let him observe, in short, the whole of their
demeanor, the real mutual affection evinced, not in words, but in
unequivocal deeds.

'Let him observe these things, and having then cast a look at the lives
of the great and wealthy, he will say, with me, that when a man is
choosing his partner for life, the dread of poverty ought to be cast to
the winds. A laborer's cottage in a cleanly condition; the husband or
wife having a babe in arms, looking at two or three older ones, playing
between the flower borders, going from the wicket to the door, is,
according to my taste, the most interesting object that eyes ever
beheld; and it is an object to be seen in no country on earth but
England.'

It happens, however, that the writer had not seen all the countries
upon earth, nor even all in the interior of United America. There are
as moving instances of native simplicity and substantial happiness here
as in any other country; and occasionally in even the higher classes.
The wife of a distinguished lawyer and senator in Congress, never left
the society of her own children, to go for once to see her friends
abroad, in _eleven years_! I am not defending the conduct of the
husband who would doom his wife to imprisonment in his own house, even
amid a happy group of children, for eleven years; but the example
shows, at least, that there are women fitted for domestic life in other
countries besides England.

Ardent young men may fear that great sobriety in a young woman argues a
want of that warmth which they naturally so much desire and approve.
But observation and experience attest to the contrary. They tell us
that levity is ninety-nine times out of a hundred, the companion of a
_want_ of ardent feeling. But the _licentious_ never _love_. Their
passion is chiefly animal. Even better women, if they possess light and
frivolous minds, have seldom any ardent passion.

I would not, however, recommend that you should be too severe in
judging, when the conduct does not go beyond mere _levity_, and is not
bordering on _loose_ conduct; for something certainly depends here on
constitution and animal spirits, and something on the manners of the
country.

If any person imagine that the sobriety I have been recommending would
render young women moping or gloomy, he is much mistaken, for the
contrary is the fact. I have uniformly found--and I began to observe it
in my very childhood--that your jovial souls, men or women, except when
over the bottle, are of all human beings the most dull and insipid.
They can no more exist--they may _vegetate_--but they can no more
_live_ without some excitement, than a fish could live on the top of
the Alleghany. If it be not the excitement of the bottle, it must be
that of the tea or the coffee cup, or food converted into some
unwholesome form or other by condiments; or if it be none of these,
they must have some excitement of the intellect, for intemperance is
not confined to the use of condiments and poisons for the body; there
are condiments and poisons to mind and heart. In fact, they usually
accompany each other.

Show me a person who cannot live on plain and simple food and the only
drink the Creator ever made, and as a general rule you will show me a
person to whom the plain and the solid and the useful in domestic,
social, intellectual, and moral life are insipid if not disgusting.
'They are welcome to all that sort of labor,' said one of these
creatures--not rationals--this very day, to me, in relation to plain
domestic employments.--Show me a female, as many, alas! very many in
fashionable life are now trained, and you show me a person who has none
of the qualities that fit her to be a help meet for man in a life of
simplicity. She could recite well at the high school, no doubt; but the
moment she leaves school, she has nothing to do, and is taught to do
nothing. I have seen girls, of this description, and they may be seen
by others.

But what is such a female--one who can hardly help herself--good for,
at home or abroad; married, or single? The moment she has not some
feast, or party, or play, or novel, or--I know not what--something to
keep up a fever, the moment I say that she has not something of this
sort to anticipate or enjoy, that moment she is miserable. Wo to the
young man who becomes wedded for life to a creature of this
description. She may stay at home, for want of a better place, and she
may add one to the national census every ten years, but a companion, or
a mother, she cannot be.

I should dislike a moping melancholy creature as much as any man,
though were I tied to such a thing, I could live with her; but I never
could enjoy her society, nor but half of my own. He is but half a man
who is thus wedded, and will exclaim, in a literal sense, 'When shall I
be delivered from the body of this death?'

One hour, an _animal_ of this sort is moping, especially if nobody but
her husband is present; the next hour, if others happen to be present,
she has plenty of smiles; the next she is giggling or capering about;
and the next singing to the motion of a lazy needle, or perhaps weeping
over a novel. And this is called sentiment! _She_ is a woman of feeling
and good taste!

7. INDUSTRY.

Let not the individual whose eye catches the word _industry_, at the
beginning of this division of my subject, condemn me as degrading
females to the condition of mere wheels in a machine for money-making;
for I mean no such thing. There is nothing more abhorrent to the soul
of a sensible man than female _avarice_. The 'spirit of a man' may
sustain him, while he sees avaricious and miserly individuals among his
own sex, though the sight is painful enough, even here; but a female
miser, 'who can bear?'

Still if woman is intended to be a 'help meet,' for the other sex, I
know of no reason why she should not be so in physical concerns, as
well as mental and moral. I know not by what rule it is that many
resolve to remain for ever in celibacy, unless they believe their
companion can 'support' them, without labor. I have sometimes even
doubted whether any person who makes these declarations can be sincere.
Yet when I hear people, of both sexes, speak of poverty as a greater
calamity than death, I am led to think that this dread of poverty does
really exist among both sexes. And there are reasons for believing that
some females, bred in fashionable life, look forward to matrimony as a
state, of such entire exemption from care and labor, and of such
uninterrupted ease, that they would prefer celibacy and even death to
those duties which scripture, and reason, and common sense, appear to
me to enjoin.

Such persons, whatever may be their other qualifications, I call upon
every young man to avoid, as he would a pestilence. If they are really
determined to live and act as mere drones in society, let them live
alone. Do not give them an opportunity to spread the infection of so
wretched a disease, if you can honestly help it.

The woman who does not actually prefer action to inaction--industry to
idleness--labor to ease--and who does not steadfastly resolve to labor
moderately as long as she lives, whatever may be her circumstances, is
unfit for life, social or domestic. It is not for me to say, in what
_form_ her labor shall be applied, except in rearing the young. But
labor she ought--all she is able--while life and health lasts, at
something or other; or she ought not to complain if she suffers the
_natural penalty_; and she ought to do it with cheerfulness.

I like much the quaint remark of a good old lady of ninety. She was
bred to labor, had labored through the whole of her long and eventful
life, and was still at her 'wheel.' 'Why,' said she, 'people ought to
strain _every nerve_ to get property, as a matter of Christian duty.'

I should choose to modify this old lady's remark, and say that, people
ought to do all they can _without straining_ their _muscles_ or
_nerves_; not to get property, but because it is at once, their duty
and their happiness.

The great object of life is to do good. The great object of society is
to increase the power to good. Both sexes should aim, in matrimony, at
a more extended sphere of usefulness. To increase an estate, merely, is
a low and unworthy aim, from which may God preserve the rising
generation. Still I must say, that I greatly prefer the avaricious
being--a monster though she might be--to the stupid soul who would not
lift a finger if she could help it, and who determines to fold her arms
whenever she has a convenient opportunity.

If a female be lazy, there will be lazy domestics, and, what is a great
deal worse, children will acquire this habit. Every thing, however
necessary to be done, will be put off to the last moment, and then it
will be done badly, and, in many cases, not at all. The dinner will be
too late; the journey or the visit will be tardy; inconveniences of all
sorts will be continually arising. There will always be a heavy arrear
of things unperformed; and this, even among the most wealthy, is a
great evil; for if they have no business imposed upon them by
necessity, they _make_ business for themselves. Life would be
intolerable without it; and therefore an indolent woman must always be
an evil, be her rank or station what it may.

But, _who is to tell_ whether a girl will make an industrious woman?
How is the pur-blind lover especially, to be able to ascertain whether
she, whose smiles and dimples and bewitching lips have half bereft him
of his senses; how is he to be able to judge, from any thing that he
can see, whether the beloved object will be industrious or lazy? Why,
it is very difficult; it is a matter that reason has very little to do
with. Still there are indications which enable a man, not wholly
deprived of the use of his reason, to form a pretty accurate judgment
in this matter.

It was a famous story some years ago, that a young man, who was
courting one of three sisters, happened to be on a visit to her, when
all the three were present, and when one said to the others, 'I
_wonder_ where _our_ needle is.' Upon which he withdrew, as soon as was
consistent with the rules of politeness, resolving to think no more of
a girl who possessed a needle only in partnership, and who, it
appeared, was not too well informed as to the place where even that
share was deposited.

This was, to be sure, a very flagrant instance of a want of industry;
for, if the third part of the use of a needle satisfied her, when
single, it was reasonable to anticipate that marriage would banish that
useful implement altogether. But such instances are seldom suffered to
come in contact with the eyes and ears of the lover. There are,
however, as I have already said, certain _rules_, which, if attended to
with care, will serve as pretty sure guides.

And, first, if you find the tongue lazy, you may be nearly certain that
the hands and feet are not very industrious. By laziness of the tongue
I do not mean silence; but, I mean, a _slow_ and _soft_ utterance; a
sort of _sighing_ out of the words, instead of _speaking_ them; a sort
of letting the sounds fall out, as if the party were sick at stomach.
The pronunciation of an industrious person is generally _quick_, and
_distinct_; the voice, if not strong, _firm_ at the least. Not
masculine, but as feminine as possible; not a _croak_ nor a _bawl_, but
a quick, distinct, and sound voice.

One writer insists that the motion of those little members of the body,
the teeth, are very much in harmony with the operations of the mind;
and a very observing gentleman assures me that he can judge pretty
accurately of the temper, and indeed of the general character of a
_child_, by his manner of eating. And I have no doubt of the fact.
Nothing is more obvious than that the temper of the child who is so
greedy as to swallow down his food habitually, without masticating it,
must be very different from that of him who habitually eats slowly.
Hunger, I know, will quicken the jaws in either case, but I am
supposing them on an equal footing in this respect.

Another mark of industry is, a _quick step_, and a somewhat _heavy
tread_, showing that the foot comes down with a _hearty good will_. If
the body lean a little forward, and the eyes keep steadily in the same
direction, while the feet are going, so much the better, for these
discover _earnestness_ to arrive at the intended point. I do not like,
and I _never_ liked, your _sauntering_, soft-stepping girls, who move
as if they were perfectly indifferent as to the result. And, as to the
_love_ part of the story, who ever expects ardent and lasting affection
from one of these sauntering girls, will, when too late, find his
mistake. The character is much the same throughout; and probably no man
ever yet saw a sauntering girl, who did not, when married, make an
indifferent wife, and a cold-hearted mother; cared very little for,
either by husband or children; and, of course, having no store of those
blessings which are the natural resources to apply to in sickness and
in old age.

8. EARLY RISING.

_Early rising_ is another mark of industry; and though, in the higher
stations of life, it may be of no importance in a mere pecuniary point
of view, it is, even there, of importance in other respects; for it is
rather difficult to keep love alive towards a woman who never sees the
_dew_, never beholds the rising _sun_, and who constantly comes
directly from a reeking bed to the breakfast table, and there chews,
without appetite, the choicest morsels of human food. A man might,
perhaps, endure this for a month or two, without being disgusted; but
not much longer.

As to people in the middle rank of life, where a living and a provision
for children is to be sought by labor of some sort or other, late
rising in the wife is certain ruin; and rarely will you find an
early-rising wife, who had been a late-rising girl. If brought up to
late rising, she will like it; it will be her _habit_; she will, when
married, never want excuses for indulging in the habit. At first she
will be indulged without bounds; and to make a _change_ afterwards will
be difficult, for it will be deemed a _wrong_ done to her; she will
ascribe it to diminished affection. A quarrel must ensue, or, the
husband must submit to be ruined, or, at the very least, to see half
the fruit of his labor snored and lounged away.

And, is this being unreasonably harsh or severe upon woman? By no
means. It arises from an ardent desire to promote the happiness, and to
add to the natural, legitimate, and salutary influence of the female
sex. The tendency of this advice is to promote the preservation of
their health; to prolong the duration of their beauty; to cause them to
be loved to the last day of their lives; and to give them, during the
whole of those lives, that weight and consequence, and respect, of
which laziness would render them wholly unworthy.

9. FRUGALITY.

This means the contrary of extravagance. It does not mean _stinginess_;
it does not mean _pinching_; but it means an abstaining from all
unnecessary expenditure, and all unnecessary use of goods of any and of
every sort. It is a quality of great importance, whether the rank in
life be high or low.

Some people are, indeed, so rich, they have such an over-abundance of
money and goods, that how to get rid of them would, to a spectator,
seem to be their only difficulty. How many individuals of fine estates,
have been ruined and degraded by the extravagance of their wives! More
frequently by their _own_ extravagance, perhaps; but, in numerous
instances, by that of those whose duty it is to assist in upholding
their stations by husbanding their fortunes.

If this be the case amongst the opulent, who have estates to draw upon,
what must be the consequences of a want of frugality in the middle and
lower ranks of life? Here it must be fatal, and especially among that
description of persons whose wives have, in many cases, the receiving
as well as the expending of money. In such a case, there wants nothing
but extravagance in the wife to make ruin as inevitable as the arrival
of old age.

To obtain security against this is very difficult; yet, if the lover be
not quite _blind_, he may easily discover a propensity towards
extravagance. The object of his addresses will, nine times out of ten,
never be the manager of a house; but she must have her _dress_, and
other little matters under her control. If she be costly in these; if,
in these, she step above her rank, or even to the top of it; if she
purchase all she is able to purchase, and prefer the showy to the
useful, the gay and the fragile to the less sightly and more durable,
he may be sure that the disposition will cling to her through life. If
he perceive in her a taste for costly food, costly furniture, costly
amusements: if he find her love of gratification to be bounded only by
her want of means; if he find her full of admiration of the trappings
of the rich, and of desire to be able to imitate them, he may be pretty
sure that she will not spare his purse, when once she gets her hand
into it; and, therefore, if he can bid adieu to her charms, the sooner
he does it, the better.

Some of the indications of extravagance in a lady are ear-rings,
broaches, bracelets, buckles, necklaces, diamonds, (real or mock,) and
nearly all the ornaments which women put upon their persons.

These things may be more proper in _palaces_, or in scenes resembling
palaces; but, when they make their appearance amongst people in the
middle rank of life, where, after all, they only serve to show that
poverty in the parties which they wish to disguise; when the mean,
tawdry things make their appearance in this rank of life, they are the
sure indications of a disposition that will always be straining at what
it can never attain.

To marry a girl of this disposition is really self-destruction. You
never can have either property or peace. Earn her a horse to ride, she
will want a gig: earn the gig, she will want a chariot: get her that,
she will long for a coach and four: and, from stage to stage, she will
torment you to the end of her or your days; for, still there will be
somebody with a finer equipage than you can give her; and, as long as
this is the case, you will never have rest. Reason would tell her, that
she could never be at the _top_; that she must stop at some point short
of that; and that, therefore, all expenses in the rivalship are so much
thrown away. But, reason and broaches and bracelets seldom go in
company. The girl who has not the sense to perceive that her person is
disfigured and not beautified by parcels of brass and tin, or even gold
and silver, as well to _regret_, if she dare not _oppose_ the tyranny
of absurd fashions, is not entitled to a full measure of the confidence
of any individual.

10. PERSONAL NEATNESS.

There never yet was, and there never will be sincere and ardent love,
of long duration, where personal neatness is wholly neglected. I do not
say that there are not those who would live peaceably and even
contentedly in these circumstances. But what I contend for is this:
that there never can exist, for any length of time, ardent _affection_,
in any man towards a woman who neglects neatness, either in her person,
or in her house affairs.

Men may be careless as to their own person; they may, from the nature
of their business, or from their want of time to adhere to neatness in
dress, be slovenly in their own dress and habits; but, they do not
relish this in their wives, who must still have _charms_; and charms
and neglect of the person seldom go together. I do not, of course,
approve of it even in men.

We may, indeed, lay it down as a rule of almost universal application,
that supposing all other things to be equal, he who is most guilty of
personal neglect; will be the most ignorant and the most vicious. _Why_
there should be, universally, a connection between slovenliness,
ignorance, and vice, is a question I have no room in this work to
discuss.

I am well acquainted with one whole family who neglect their persons
from principle. The gentleman, who is a sort of new light in religious
concerns, will tell you that the true Christian _should_ 'slight the
hovel, as beneath his care.' But there is a want of intelligence, and
even common refinement in the family, that certainly does not and
_cannot_ add much to their own happiness, or recommend religion--aside
from the fact that it greatly annoys their neighbors. And though the
head of the family observes many external duties with Jewish
strictness, neither he nor any of its members are apt to bridle their
tongues, or remember that on _ordinary_ as well as _special_ occasions
they are bound to 'do all to the glory of God.' As to the connection of
mind with matter--I mean the dependence of mind and soul on body, they
are wholly ignorant.

It is not dress that the husband wants to be perpetual: it is not
finery; but _cleanliness_ in every thing. Women generally dress enough,
especially when they _go abroad_. This _occasional_ cleanliness is not
the thing that a husband wants: he wants it always; in-doors as well as
out; by night as well as by day; on the floor as well as on the table;
and, however he may complain about the trouble and the 'expense' of it,
he would complain more if it were neglected.

The indications of female neatness are, first, a clean _skin_. The
hands and face will usually be clean, to be sure, if there be soap and
water within reach; but if on observing other parts of the head besides
the face, you make discoveries indicating a different character, the
sooner you cease your visits the better. I hope, now, that no young
woman who may chance to see this book, will be offended at this, and
think me too severe on her sex. I am only telling that which all men
think; and, it is a decided advantage to them to be fully informed of
our thoughts on the subject. If any one, who reads this, shall find,
upon self-examination, that she is defective in this respect, let her
take the hint, and correct the defect.

In the _dress_, you can, amongst rich people, find little whereon to
form a judgment as to cleanliness, because they have not only the dress
prepared for them, but put upon them into the bargain. But, in the
middle ranks of life, the dress is a good criterion in two respects:
first, as to its _color_; for if the _white_ be a sort of _yellow_,
cleanly hands would have been at work to prevent that. A _white-yellow_
cravat, or shirt, on a man, speaks at once the character of his wife;
and, you may be assured, that she will not take with your dress pains
which she has never taken with her own.

Then, the manner of _putting on_ the dress, is no bad foundation for
judging. If this be careless, and slovenly, if it do not fit
properly,--no matter for its _mean quality_; mean as it may be, it may
be neatly and trimly put on--if it be slovenly put on, I say, take care
of yourself; for, you will soon find to your cost, that a sloven in one
thing, is a sloven in all things. The plainer people, judge greatly
from the state of the covering of the ankles; and, if that be not clean
and tight, they conclude that the rest is not as it ought to be. Look
at the shoes! If they be trodden on one side, loose on the foot, or run
down at the heel, it is a very bad _sign_; and as to going _slipshod_,
though at coming down in the morning, and even before daylight, make up
your mind to a rope, rather than live with a slipshod woman.

How much do women lose by inattention to these matters! Men, in
general, say nothing about it to their wives, but they _think_ about
it; they envy their more lucky neighbors, and in numerous cases,
consequences the most serious arise from this apparently trifling
cause. Beauty is valuable; it is one of the _ties_, and a _strong_ one
too; but it cannot last to old age; whereas the charm of cleanliness
never ends but with life itself. It has been said that the sweetest
flowers, when they really become putrid, are the most offensive. So the
most beautiful woman, if found with an uncleansed skin, is, in my
estimation, the most disagreeable.

11. A GOOD TEMPER.

This is a very difficult thing to ascertain beforehand. Smiles are
cheap; they are easily put on for the occasion; and, besides, the
frowns are, according to the lover's whim, interpreted into the
contrary. By 'good temper,' I do not mean an easy temper, a serenity
which nothing disturbs; for that is a mark of laziness. Sullenness, if
you be not too blind to perceive it, is a temper to be avoided by all
means. A sullen man is bad enough; what, then, must be a sullen woman,
and that woman a _wife_; a constant inmate, a companion day and night!
Only think of the delight of setting at the same table, and occupying
the same chamber, for a week, without exchanging a word all the while!
Very bad to be scolding for such a length of time; but this is far
better than 'the _sulks_.'

But if you have your eyes, and look sharp, you will discover symptoms
of this, if it unhappily exist. She will, at some time or other, show
it towards some one or other of the family; or, perhaps, towards
yourself; and you may be quite sure that, in this respect, marriage
will not mend her. Sullenness arises from capricious displeasure not
founded in reason. The party takes offence unjustifiably; is unable to
frame a complaint, and therefore expresses displeasure by silence. The
remedy for it is, to suffer it to take its _full swing_, but it is
better not to have the disease in your house; and to be _married to
it_, is little short of madness.

_Querulousness_ is a great fault. No man, and, especially, no _woman_,
likes to hear a continual plaintiveness. That she complain, and roundly
complain, of your want of punctuality, of your coolness, of your
neglect, of your liking the company of others: these are all very well,
more especially as they are frequently but too just. But an everlasting
complaining, without rhyme or reason, is a bad sign. It shows want of
patience, and, indeed, want of sense.

But the contrary of this, a cold _indifference_, is still worse. 'When
will you come again? You can never find time to come here. You like any
company better than mine.' These, when groundless, are very teasing,
and demonstrate a disposition too full of anxiousness; but, from a girl
who always receives you with the same civil smile, lets you, at your
own good pleasure, depart with the same; and who, when you take her by
the hand, holds her cold fingers as straight as sticks, I should say,
in mercy, preserve _me_!

_Pertinacity_ is a very bad thing in anybody, and especially in a young
woman; and it is sure to increase in force with the age of the party.
To have the last word, is a poor triumph; but with some people it is a
species of disease of the mind. In a wife it must be extremely
troublesome; and, if you find an ounce of it in the maid, it will
become a pound in the wife. A fierce _disputer_ is a most disagreeable
companion; and where young women thrust their _say_ into conversations
carried on by older persons, give their opinions in a positive manner,
and court a contest of the tongue, those must be very bold men who will
encounter them as wives.

Still, of all the faults as to _temper_, your melancholy ladies have
the worst, unless you have the same mental disease yourself. Many wives
are, at times, _misery-makers_; but these carry it on as a regular
trade. They are always unhappy about something, either past, present,
or to come. Both arms full of children is a pretty efficient remedy in
most cases; but, if these ingredients be wanting, a little want, a
little _real_ trouble, a little _genuine affliction_, often will effect
a cure.

12. ACCOMPLISHMENTS.

By accomplishments, I mean those things, which are usually comprehended
in what is termed a useful and polite education. Now it is not unlikely
that the fact of my adverting to this subject so late, may lead to the
opinion that I do not set a proper estimate on this female
qualification.

But it is not so. Probably few set too high an estimate upon it. Its
_absolute_ importance has, I am confident, been seldom overrated. It is
true I do not like a _bookish_ woman better than a bookish man;
especially a great devourer of that most contemptible species of books
with whose burden the press daily groans: I mean _novels_. But mental
cultivation, and even what is called _polite_ learning, along with the
foregoing qualifications, are a most valuable acquisition, and make
every female, as well as all her associates, doubly happy. It is only
when books, and music, and a taste for the fine arts are substituted
for other and more important things, that they should be allowed to
change love or respect to disgust.

It sometimes happens, I know, that two persons are, in this respect,
pretty equally yoked. But what of that? It only makes each party
twofold more the child of misfortune than before. I have known a couple
of intelligent persons who would sit with their 'feet in the ashes,' as
it were, all day, to read some new and bewitching book, forgetting
every want of the body; perhaps even forgetting that they _had_ bodies.
Were they therefore happy, or likely to be so?

Drawing, music, embroidery, (and I might mention half a dozen other
things of the same class) where they do not exclude the more useful and
solid matters, may justly be regarded as appropriate branches of female
education; and in some circumstances and conditions of life,
indispensable. Music,--vocal and instrumental--and drawing, to a
certain extent, seem to me desirable in all. As for dancing, I do not
feel quite competent to decide. As the world is, however, I am almost
disposed to reject it altogether. At any rate, if a young lady is
accomplished in every other respect, you need not seriously regret that
she has not attended to dancing, especially as it is conducted in most
of our schools.



