
CHAPTER VII

IMPORTANCE OF THE SEXUAL LIFE OF THE CHILD


The problem of the significance of sexual phenomena in the child is
naturally one of great importance. We have here, in fact, two problems
to consider: first, whether the appearance of sexual phenomena in
childhood indicates a morbid or in other ways abnormal state; and,
secondly, what are the consequences of the occurrence of sexual
phenomena in the child. An example will help to illustrate the need for
drawing this distinction. Certain malformations of the external ear are
indications of the existence of a morbid degenerative condition; but
from the malformation itself there is nothing to fear. Similarly with
the sexual life of the child, it may happen that a manifestation
indicates the existence of morbidity, although the manifestation does
not by itself entail upon the child any serious consequences. On the
other hand, sexual phenomena in the child deserve in some cases the most
attentive study, owing to the dangers likely to result from their
occurrence.

With regard to the first question, whether sexual manifestations in the
child indicate _per se_ the existence of a morbid state, it is not
necessary to say much here, since the subject has been fully discussed
in the section on Etiology (see page 148). In any case, we must avoid
exaggerating the importance of sexual feelings in the child. Ribbing[87]
contends that we must regard it as abnormal when a boy of thirteen or
fourteen is obsessed (_hante_) by erotic ideas. This is true enough if
there is real obsession by such ideas, but it is not true if there is no
more than an occasional uprising of sexual feelings. On page 118 of this
work, I explained that an over-development of the sexual life in the
child was an indication of the existence of a congenital morbid
predisposition.

Passing to the second question, as to the consequences of the occurrence
of sexual phenomena in the child, these consequences may be very various
in nature. They arise more especially in the hygienic, social, ethical,
educational, forensic, and intellectual domains.

First of all, then, let us consider the dangers to health.

The earlier the sexual impulse awakens, the earlier also arises the
danger of sexual practices, and more particularly of masturbation.
Common sensations in the genital organs, the feelings associated
therewith, the impulse to allay the unsatisfied libido--all these may
lead the boy to handle and rub his penis. The girl is affected by
similar stimuli. In these cases, the first act of masturbation does not
depend upon the desire to enjoy a voluptuous sensation, but results from
the impulse to allay vague feelings of uneasiness. Only subsequently,
when the child has learned by experience that mechanical stimulation of
the genital organs induces voluptuous sensations, or when he has been
taught this fact by a seducer, does the desire to produce voluptuous
sensations become the mainspring driving to masturbation. The danger, of
course, increases, in proportion as the child comes fully to understand
that in this way it can produce agreeable sensations, all the more
because the child is either unaware of the injurious consequences of the
practice, or, if it has been informed of these consequences, the
knowledge cannot weigh in the balance against the easily induced
enjoyment. But, let me say here at the outset, the dangers of
masturbation have been greatly exaggerated. Chiefly since the
publication, at the end of the eighteenth century, of Tissot's book on
masturbation, but to some extent also even earlier, it has been usual to
refer to masturbation the occurrence of innumerable diseases, including
mental disorders and locomotor ataxia. I do not propose to reproduce the
account given by Tissott, and after him by Hufeland, and also by the
innumerable quacks and swindlers who trade in the "cure" of "secret
diseases"--these latter, preying upon the fears of humanity, declare
that every possible affliction in both sexes may result from
masturbation, and recommend innumerable miraculous remedies for these
often imaginary ills. Disorders and displacements of the uterus, ulcers
and cancer, gastralgia and gastric spasms, jaundice, pains in the nose,
are supposed in women to result from masturbation, as well as fluor
albus, nymphomania, &c. There is hardly a single organ of the body of
which disease and destruction have not by many been referred to
masturbation. In reality all this is false. It is more than doubtful
whether, as far as adults are concerned, occasional masturbation is
necessarily more harmful than normal sexual intercourse. According to my
own observations, the principal question is whether, in masturbation,
the bodily and mental stimuli employed to obtain sexual gratification
involve an especial shock to the nervous system--a greater shock than
results from normal sexual intercourse. More powerful shock may, indeed,
arise from the fact that the masturbatory act is apt to be repeated with
excessive frequency; and we have to admit that the chief danger of
masturbation lies in the fact that there is so grave a risk of sexual
excess. Owing, too, to the frequency of repetition, a need will very
readily arise for an increase in the stimulation, and this may apply
alike to the bodily stimuli and to the mental; and the stronger the
stimuli have to be, the more powerful also will be the general effect on
the nervous system. Thus the danger of shock to the nervous system from
masturbation will be seen to depend, first, upon the frequency with
which the act is repeated, and, secondly, upon the increasing intensity
of the stimulation. To this extent, therefore, masturbation may be more
dangerous than normal sexual intercourse; for this latter also, unless
it is to exert an unfavourable influence on the health, must not involve
mental and bodily stimulation of too powerful a kind. The good effects
of sexual intercourse depend upon its adequacy to the feelings, upon the
absence of any exhausting imaginative activity, and upon the absence
also of artificial bodily stimulation. But artificial stimuli and
exhausting imaginative activity are often associated with coitus also,
in cases in which the stimulus evoked by the personality of the sexual
partner is inadequate. Again, the powerful efforts which must as a rule
be made by persons who desire to repeat the act of intercourse several
times within a brief period, will have a similar effect upon the system
to the powerful imaginative activity in cases of masturbation. The
resemblances, on the one hand, and the differences, on the other,
between masturbation and normal sexual intercourse, will be apparent to
those who carefully consider the facts just stated; and it will also
become apparent in what circumstances masturbation must be regarded as
injurious. This is all I have to say concerning masturbation in adults.

The idea that masturbation is, generally speaking, dangerous, is by many
restricted to the practice during childhood and youth, the belief in its
danger at this stage of life being based upon the view that the organs
are at this time insufficiently developed. But even this contention
cannot be regarded as fully established. I will, in the first place,
consider those cases only in which masturbation is practised after the
formation of semen has begun, but when the processes by which bodily
maturity is attained are not yet fully completed. To the theoretical
assumption that masturbation is especially hurtful in cases in which the
organs are not yet adequately developed, we may oppose the consideration
that the completer development of organs is favoured by exercise. We
cannot further discuss such theoretical speculations, which lack the
firm foundation of experience. On the whole, I agree with the estimate
of the consequences of masturbation expressed by Aschaffenburg,[88] a
man to whom we are indebted for the refutation of many extravagant
views. Experience teaches that almost all men, healthy and unhealthy,
moral and immoral, have masturbated for some years, once or several
times a week, towards the end of the second and during the beginning of
the third period of childhood. In view of this experience, what right
have we to maintain seriously that masturbation is, generally speaking,
dangerous to health. It is, of course, possible to contend that these
persons would have developed better if they had not masturbated. But
there is equal ground for asserting the opposite. We possess no evidence
whatever to show that those young persons who never masturbate are in
after life stronger and healthier than the others. I know some persons
who have never masturbated. In the case of some of these, it was because
the impulse to masturbate was lacking; others, notwithstanding the
existence of a strong impulse, refrained from masturbation under the
influence of religious or ethical motives. In both of these groups, I
have seen persons exhibiting the very morbid symptoms which Tissot and
his followers referred to masturbation; and I was quite unable to
convince myself that abstinence from masturbation secured any notable
advantage. Whilst I do not assert that the morbid phenomena which I
observed in these individuals arose in consequence of their refraining
from masturbation, I consider that there is no justification for the
converse assumption in the case of those who did masturbate. I believe
that many of those patients who never masturbated were the subjects of
congenital morbid predisposition, and that, as a direct consequence of
this fact in many of them, the sexual impulse was of minimum intensity
or developed exceptionally late; I consider, therefore, that the morbid
manifestations in the domain of the nervous system were dependent, not
upon the fact that they did not masturbate, but principally upon the
congenital morbid predisposition.

Whilst I thus reject the view that masturbation in children is generally
dangerous, this must not be regarded as implying that I consider the
practice altogether indifferent as far as its influence upon health is
concerned. In the child, as in the adult, there is danger in the fact
that the act is so easy that it is likely to be repeated very
frequently, and thus to become habitual. In addition, the masturbator is
apt to require strong physical and mental stimuli, and this increase of
the stimulus may become dangerous. A special danger of persistent
masturbation is to be found in the possibility that impotence may
result. The masturbator, being accustomed to stimulate his genital
organs by manipulations, and by various methods increasing in intensity
of stimulus, will often find subsequently that the normal stimuli,
acting in part in the form of the sensory processes in the genital
organs, and in part in the form of the normal psychical influences
proceeding from without, are no longer competent to induce the normal
sexual reactions (erection and ejaculation). This affects chiefly
members of the male sex, but in some instances the same is true also of
women. It is true that in women the sexual act is rather of a passive
character, erection not being in them essential as it is in the male;
but in the case of women also, long-continued masturbation, whether
practised in childhood or subsequently, may bring about so intimate a
dependence of sexual desire, ejaculation, and gratification, upon the
artificial stimuli, that the occurrence of these phenomena in normal
coitus may be hindered or completely inhibited.

Some writers contend that sexual perversions, homosexuality, for
example, may be induced by masturbation, but I myself doubt this. For
such a development to be possible, it is necessary that very special
influences should be in operation, more particularly a congenital
predisposition, or the cultivation of the perversion by perverse
imaginative processes--this latter, indeed, occurring very readily in
masturbators. But masturbation to excess is far more likely to induce
general neurasthenia than to give rise to sexual perversions. When I
speak of excessive masturbation, however, it must be admitted that the
term is a relative one. What is harmful excess in one person is not
necessarily excess in another. This is true of children as well as of
adults. I have seen children who, owing to premature awakening of the
sexual life, have begun to masturbate at a very early age, without any
serious effect upon health. Having seen such children again in adult
life, after the lapse of more than fifteen years, I consider that I have
had opportunities for forming a sound judgment upon this point. We have
to take into account the fact that when a youthful masturbator
subsequently exhibits nervous manifestations, these often result from
the anxiety he has experienced on being informed of the serious
consequences of masturbation. Not masturbation itself, but fear of the
effects of the practice, is here responsible for the resulting injury to
health. Experience teaches that a certain sort of popular literature has
an especially unfavourable influence in this respect. Moreover, in many
cases, self-reproach on _moral_ grounds, it may be in childhood, but
more often later in life, must in such persons be regarded as the cause
of the appearance of nervous and mental symptoms. The dread of having
committed a deadly sin, or an extremely immoral act, explains a part of
the results which are commonly referred directly to masturbation. The
dangers of masturbation must not be underestimated, but exaggeration
must equally be avoided. I do not believe that in children masturbation
is, generally speaking, more dangerous than it is in adults; but I
consider that masturbation resulting from a spontaneous impulse is less
harmful, than when artificial bodily and mental stimuli are freely
employed. And though the dangers are slightest when masturbation is not
continued for a long period, still, in this connexion, a period of a few
years cannot be regarded as so very long; at any rate, practical
experience shows us that we must avoid over-estimating the importance of
masturbation even if continued for several years.

A particular description must now be given of masturbation as practised
in boys before the formation of semen has begun--that is, before the
fourteenth or fifteenth year of life. Fere[89] regards orgasm without
ejaculation as very dangerous, and compares its effects with the
phenomena of fatigue. The nervous discharge occurring in the orgasm may
certainly explain the depressed state of many masturbators, also their
tired appearance, dilated pupils, and languid movements. We note also
mental disturbances as well as physical, especially diminished powers of
attention and memory, and somnolence up to the point of narcolepsy.
According to Fere, the physical and the mental symptoms alike can be
detected by precise investigations. In children suspected of
masturbation, dynamometric observations disclosed a notable diminution,
to the extent even of one-half, when the children were not kept under
constant observation and when other signs of masturbation existed; and
in these cases experimental observation also showed a diminution of the
power of attention. The test applied was to erase some particular letter
of the alphabet from one page of a book. When such a test is employed,
the practice of masturbation is said to have an unfavourable effect, and
to cause mistakes. I do not think that these so-called precise
investigations are of much value, for suggestion on the part of the
experimenter, who is sometimes prejudiced, may play a great part in
producing the results. Even when transient phenomena of fatigue appear,
and are demonstrable by experiment, it does not follow that any
permanent injury has been done, and just as little do otherwise
transient manifestations of fatigue necessarily indicate anything
pathological, or foreshadow the onset of any progressive morbid state.

The clinical material offered in support of the idea that masturbation
is especially dangerous in children too young to have an ejaculation
should, moreover, be carefully and critically examined. I myself
formerly accepted the view of most authoritative writers as to the grave
danger of masturbation in these circumstances. But we can no longer do
this unconditionally. The gradual change in my own views arose as
follows. From the commencement of my medical practice I was frequently
consulted about masturbation in children. Many of these cases date from
ten, fifteen, and even twenty years back. I have recently instituted
inquiries as to the present condition of my former patients. In so far
as information was obtainable, I have been astonished to learn how well
boys, who from the age of eight, nine, or ten had masturbated for
several years, had developed as youths and as full-grown men. I have had
similar experiences in the case of girls. Among my patients, I have had
girls who masturbated at the age of five or six years; and ten to twenty
years later, when some of them have married, I have gathered information
regarding their subsequent development, either from the patients
themselves or from their associates. Here also it was very remarkable to
learn how rarely unfavourable consequences have occurred from the
practice of masturbation in early childhood, notwithstanding the dangers
commonly supposed to attend thereon. Especially rare have ill
consequences been in those cases in which masturbation was not pushed to
the point of inducing orgasm, but in which the children have masturbated
simply in order to procure agreeable local stimulation. But in some
instances also, in which orgasm without ejaculation had been observed,
no bad results have occurred. Such results are, however, much more
likely to follow in cases in which there has been prolonged sexual
excitement preparatory to the orgasm, whilst this latter has been
artificially deferred as long as possible. Where this has been habitual,
I have, in some of the patients, seen serious consequences, and
especially neurasthenic symptoms, result from masturbation. But the
persons thus affected were in many cases the subjects of such severe
hereditary taint, that it was impossible to decide to what extent their
troubles were due to congenital predisposition, and to what extent they
were referable to masturbation or to other noxious influences. It is,
moreover, probable that when the nervous system is less resistent in
consequence of congenital predisposition, the bad effects of
masturbation will more readily appear than in those whose inheritance is
a sound one.

As a result of these experiences, I feel justified in coming to the
following conclusions regarding masturbation during childhood. _It has
not been proved that masturbation during childhood, with or without
ejaculation, is generally dangerous. The possibility of danger resulting
from the practice is, however, increased by long-continued and
frequently repeated masturbation; also by the artificial postponement of
the voluptuous acme, and by congenital predisposition to nervous
disorders._ My notes of the cases which I have seen during many years of
medical practice show that, even in children, masturbation does not
necessarily do any harm.

CASE 15.--The girl X., four years of age, was brought to see me because
it had been noticed that she frequently tried to handle her genital
organs, and also that she stimulated the same organs by means of rubbing
movements of the crossed thighs. Her mother had further from time to
time noticed rocking movements, associated with a fixed stare, which had
aroused suspicions of the occurrence of the sexual orgasm. Various
methods were tried to put a stop to these practices, but without result.
Hypnotic treatment was not tried, because the child was still too young
and her attention wandered too much. Mechanical methods of control were
also fruitless. The trouble continued for five years, during all of
which time the child was under my own observation. She went to school,
where she proved a diligent scholar, and was one of the most successful
pupils; her physical condition was also excellent. Thenceforward, for
several years, I received no precise information about the patient,
although from time to time I saw some of her associates. But after about
eight years, I had an opportunity of learning her later history. The
child which had begun to masturbate when four years old was now a young
lady of eighteen. When fourteen years old she had for some months
suffered from chlorosis, but had never been troubled by any other
serious illness. I could not learn with certainty whether the habit of
masturbation had been discontinued; but there had been no definite
evidence of the practice of masturbation, or of any other artificial
sexual stimulation, after the age of nine. At the present time X. is
perfectly healthy.

CASE 16.--The boy Y. was brought to me when eight years old. It had been
noticed that at night, whether sleeping or waking, he very often handled
his genital organs. Erection of the penis had also been observed from
time to time. His mother and his governess believed that he masturbated
every night. When this had been going on for several years, the patient
was brought to me for suggestive treatment. Mechanical means were
simultaneously employed, his hands being fastened at night in such a way
that he could not bring them into contact with his genital organs. But
he speedily loosed himself from his bonds. The trouble abated in
severity, but continued none the less for several years. I saw the
patient again when he was twenty-four years of age. No abnormality
whatever could be observed. He had normal sexual potency, and was
entirely free from neurasthenic symptoms.

I have hitherto, in this chapter, spoken only of the dangers of
auto-erotism. It is hardly necessary to mention the fact that the
nervous system of the child may be injuriously affected by other sexual
acts, as, for instance, by premature sexual intercourse. The occurrence
of such acts is naturally favoured by a premature awakening of the
sexual life.

We have also to consider the results of passionate love in children,
apart from actual sexual intercourse. In children with congenital
neuropathic predisposition, these results may be serious; and, as Bell
points out, symptoms of severe nervous shock may ensue, more especially
owing to separation from the beloved object, or in consequence of
rejected affection. The same writer even records several attempted
suicides consequent upon the death of the loved one; two of these
occurred in boys of eight and nine years of age respectively; two
occurred in girls, aged nine and eleven years. Eulenburg,[90] who has
made a special study of suicide and attempted suicide during
school-life, in his enumeration of the causes of such acts, mentions
several that are germane to our subject. Among these are the following:
becoming acquainted with the existence of a liaison on the part of the
loved one with another; unfortunate love; love for a married woman;
neglect of school work owing to a love-affair and consequent fear of
expulsion; and, finally, love-anxiety. It must, however, be freely
admitted that Eulenburg's cases relate to schoolboys who were fairly
old. Thus, one of these cases was that of a Catholic boy in one of the
higher forms, who had formed a liaison with a girl of sixteen in a
neighbouring girls' school, and whose Director had intervened, very
judiciously, as it appears, on learning of the affair. The other cases
in which Eulenburg mentions the age of those concerned were also those
of boys no longer very young; in some of these, double murder or double
suicide resulted. In the other comprehensive works on suicide, and even
in those dealing especially with suicide in children, I have been able
to find comparatively little material bearing on this particular
question. Brierre de Boismont,[91] indeed, tells us that children
occasionally commit suicide on account of jealousy; here, however, he
does not refer to sexual jealousy, but to jealousy of a more general
character aroused by preference shown to another child. Although such
serious consequences occur chiefly or exclusively in children who cannot
be regarded as perfectly normal, it is nevertheless possible for erotic
influences to act as the final determinant. But such serious results are
certainly comparatively rare.

Just as in former times masturbation was believed to be the cause of all
kinds of illness, so to-day, according to Freud[92] and his followers,
the general sexual experiences of children are responsible for various
subsequent illnesses. Four neuroses (neurasthenia, anxiety-neurosis,
hysteria, and compulsion-neuroses) are referred by Freud to all sorts of
disturbances of the sexual life, past or present. Hysteria and
compulsion-neuroses are regarded as a reaction to the sexual experiences
of childhood; neurasthenia and anxiety-neurosis are referred to later
sexual experiences. Freud originally assumed that during the childhood
of hysterical patients sexual seduction by adults or by older children
played the chief part; but at a later date he has advocated the view
that the imaginative activities of the days of puberty, which intervene
between the sexual experiences of childhood and the appearance of the
hysterical symptoms, are responsible for the occurrence of the latter.
Quite recently, Abraham[93] has insisted that a sexual experience may be
of some importance in relation even to the onset of dementia praecox. But
I do not consider that Freud's assumption is justified, nor do I think
that he adequately excludes the effects of hetero-and auto-suggestion.
It is out of the question that in every case of the above-mentioned
neuroses, sexual experiences should be the cause; and it is equally
erroneous to suppose that every sexual experience in childhood has the
effects which he assumes. It is true that Freud and his followers report
cases which they regard as proving their thesis. But I am by no means
satisfied with these clinical histories. They rather produce the
impression that much in the alleged histories has been introduced by the
suggestive questioning of the examiner, or that sufficient care has not
been taken to guard against illusions of memory. The impression produced
in my mind is that the theory of Freud and his followers suffices to
account for the clinical histories, not that the clinical histories
suffice to prove the truth of the theory. Freud endeavours to establish
his theory by the aid of psycho-analysis. But this involves so many
arbitrary interpretations, that it is impossible to speak of proof in
any strict sense of the term. Dreams are interpreted symbolically at
will, and other definite objects are arbitrarily assumed to be symbolic
representatives of the genital organs. I detect the principal source of
fallacy in this arbitrary interpretation of alleged symbols.

However this may be, there is no justification for the assumption that
hysteria or other neuroses are always, or even in the great majority of
instances, to be regarded as dependent upon masturbatory or other sexual
acts during childhood. We must on no account forget that an illness
often has a dozen causes or more; and although one or another of these
may have had a preponderating influence in the causation, we have no
right arbitrarily to select one of them as the efficient cause. I do not
deny that occasionally the sexual life during childhood plays a part in
inducing a subsequent neurosis; but this applies only to a comparatively
small proportion of cases, and we must guard against exaggeration in the
matter.

This is all I have to say concerning the relationships of the sexual
life of the child to the occurrence of nervous diseases. The sexual life
has, of course, important bearings on health in other ways. The venereal
diseases, in most cases, result from sexual intercourse; and it will
readily be understood that since early sexual intercourse is rendered
more likely by a premature awakening of the sexual life, an increased
danger of venereal infection will thus arise. Although infection in
children occurs comparatively seldom in consequence of spontaneously
practised sexual intercourse, and more frequently as the result of the
mishandling of children by perverted or criminal adults, still cases are
from time to time observed in which infection with venereal disease
arises in children from spontaneously sought sexual intercourse. In
Jullien's work[94] we find a striking chapter on gonorrhoea in
children, illustrated with appropriate cases. He writes. "In other
cases, little boys, sexually premature, make early attempts at sexual
intercourse. In Paris we see hardly grown youths appearing at the
specialist's clinic, quite proud that they need to be treated for
gonorrhoea. The very fact that they present themselves so coolly at
the places for the special treatment of venereal diseases, suffices to
show that they fully understand the cause of their illness." In
Jullien's opinion, venereal disease is especially serious in children,
because many of them conceal their condition as long as possible in the
hope of avoiding punishment. Barthelemy reported a case in which the
parents came to consult him because the boy was passing water every few
minutes, and because at school he was repeatedly asking to leave the
room in order to go to the urinal. Examination showed that he was
suffering from cystitis, and that this was a sequel of gonorrhoea. As
regards children of the other sex, I have myself seen cases of
gonorrhoea in which sexually immature girls have been infected in
sexual intercourse of which they themselves had been the instigators. In
most cases, infection in children results from intercourse with grown
persons, but it sometimes happens that children infect one another.
Little need be said here about the dangers of gonorrhoeal infection.
Although in children the course of the disease exhibits many
peculiarities, the general results are much the same as in adults, viz.,
pain, orchitis and epididymitis with atrophy, cystitis, &c.; and in
girls, more especially peritonitis. Other venereal infections may of
course also occur in children, such as soft chancre and syphilis. No
detailed account will be given of these diseases. Although we need
further information as to the results of venereal infection in children,
in well-informed medical circles the numerous and severe ill
consequences of such infections are well understood.

I have in this chapter spoken more especially of the dangers threatening
the child's health from the side of its sexual life. These are, of
course, not the only dangers; the moral and social dangers are even
greater. First of all, in this connexion, we have to consider the
practice of masturbation; but in our estimate of its effect upon morals,
we must be careful to avoid sanctimoniousness. The question why
masturbation is regarded as immoral has never yet been answered,
declamation being here commonly mistaken for argument. And yet reasons
may be found for the belief that masturbation may sometimes be a
positively moral act; as, for instance, when one who is dominated by a
very powerful sexual impulse, avoids injury to another by means of
masturbation. Consider a case, for example, in which one who
masturbates would otherwise transmit venereal infection to another, or
would injure another by illegitimate sexual intercourse. In cases of
perverse sexual practices in which the offender's liability to
punishment was under discussion in the law court, I have more than once
called attention to this point. Take the case of a man whose sexual
impulse is directed towards children, and who finds great difficulty in
restraining himself from sexual malpractices against children. His
action is assuredly a far more moral one if he satisfies his impulse by
the practice of masturbation, rather than by a sexual assault upon a
child! If, notwithstanding these considerations, masturbation is
generally regarded as an immoral act, the reason for this opinion must
obviously be sought in deeper and more general grounds. In the first
place, we have to take into account the fact that according to the moral
code of many persons, and certainly according to the official
theological code, the only kind of sexual intercourse that is morally
permissible is that which is known as "legitimate," _i.e._ connubial
intercourse; extra-connubial intercourse is stigmatised as immoral.
Masturbation, like extra-connubial sexual intercourse, is sexual
indulgence outside the limits of that which is alone permissible by the
canons of theological morality. Owing to the definite teaching of the
Church in this matter, the views of the common people are inevitably
influenced thereby, although the practical relationships of life are
thus completely ignored; above all, the fact is ignored that marriage
does not as a rule become possible until long after the awakening of the
sexual impulse. The purpose of the proscription by theological morality
of illegitimate intercourse and of masturbation is to effect the
prevention of all varieties of sexual indulgence except under the form
of marriage, and, if possible, under the form of marriage blessed by the
Church. The importance attributed to receiving the approval of
theological morality is seen from the fact that in all strata of the
population, however much alike in private conversation and in political
assemblies they may protest against the dominion of the Church,
nevertheless almost invariably the ecclesiastical ceremony is superadded
to the civil marriage. In our moral estimate of masturbation, we have to
take another point into consideration. We have seen that long-continued
and excessive masturbation is dangerous to health; now every voluntary
action, and every action that is commonly believed to be voluntary, the
effects of which are injurious to body or to mind, is considered to be
immoral, unless it is performed in pursuit of some lofty aim--as, for
instance, in the case of the doctor who exposes himself to some deadly
infection for the sake of his patient's welfare. But these reasons do
not suffice to account for the fact that masturbation is commonly
regarded as a more immoral act than illegitimate sexual intercourse.
Here, however, as so often happens, the popular instinct contains a
kernel of truth, which in this case relates not so much to the
individual ethical judgment as to the general interest. The popular
instinct, or we may rather say the soul of the people, commonly regards
that as immoral which, if approved, would entail serious general
consequences. In this ethical judgment we have, as it were, the
manifestation of an instinct of self-preservation on the part of the
soul of the people. We must not forget that the practice of masturbation
is extraordinarily easy, and that if it were recognised as a morally
permissible act, its frequency would be notably increased. The reason
last given, namely, the injury to health that may result from
masturbation, explains one way in which the practice is opposed to the
general interest. But another reason is still more important. The
practice of masturbation naturally limits the frequency of sexual
intercourse, not only in its illegitimate, but also in its legitimate
form. The easier an act is, the more readily, if it is deleterious, will
popular sentiment build a protective wall around it. In individual
instances, such popular valuations are devoid of logical foundation, and
for this very reason it is often impossible to reject them on logical
grounds. But they are largely based upon considerations of the general
interest, and for this reason it is often just as well that they are
impervious to logic. Hence, although in concrete cases of masturbation
physicians and schoolmasters will not always take a severe view, and, in
certain instances, as explained above, it may even be considered that
masturbation is a morally permissible act, this will not affect the
general disapproval, in consequence of which a very large number of
persons refrain from masturbation. Moreover, the absence of such
disapproval would lead to extremely serious consequences. Merely in
order to prevent interference with normal sexual intercourse between man
and woman, it is necessary that in the popular judgment masturbation, as
the greatest enemy of sexual intercourse, should be condemned. In
addition to these motives, there are others closely connected with them,
which in some cases operate unconsciously. Since masturbation is
practised in solitude, if masturbation were regarded as morally
permissible to men, the value of woman would diminish, since her wooing
and winning would be no longer necessary to man, Analogous
considerations naturally apply to masturbation in women. The need that
each sex should regard the other as indispensable is a powerful motive
in bringing about the popular condemnation of masturbation; and it must
further be remembered that the amatory life, and more especially its
psychical accompaniments, in truth only attain their fullest development
through the mutual intercourse of the sexes.

The general condemnation of masturbation is, in my view, most readily
explained on the considerations just outlined. However this may be, we
have certainly to reckon with the fact that masturbation is regarded as
an immoral act. But inasmuch as the early awakening of the sexual life,
or at least the early appearance of the phenomena of detumescence, leads
almost inevitably to the practice of masturbation, it will readily be
understood that the child is apt to be forced into a line of conduct
which conflicts with the generally accepted ethical code.

The social dangers of masturbation are very closely connected with the
ethical dangers, and we frequently find them appearing concurrently. In
isolated instances, as Lombroso and Ferrero have shown,[95] premature
awakening of sexuality may lead to prostitution. In the chapter on
Biology and Psychology, a special section is devoted to sexual
prematurity, and the authors contend that in Italy this factor plays a
greater part than it does elsewhere. It is further characteristic that
in erotic literature women who are famous or notorious for their
love-adventures are commonly described as having been the subjects of
premature sexual development. From the beautiful Helen, who at the age
of seven, according to one story, and at the age of twelve, according to
another, was deflowered by Theseus, down to modern times, we find that
premature sexual development is frequently adduced as a characteristic
of such women. Although it is true that in many cases of the seduction
of children there is no question of sexual prematurity, still, for a
part of the cases, premature sexual development is responsible. For it
can hardly be disputed that the crime of the child-seducer is greatly
facilitated, if the child meets the seducer halfway. In cases in which
sexual offences were committed on little girls, Tardieu[96] made a
special class of those in which the offence was frequently repeated upon
the same individual. Of the 60 cases of this kind, 29 were in little
girls under eleven years of age, and 26 were in girls from eleven to
fifteen years. He states that in these chronic victims, he was first of
all struck by the premature development of the genital organs and the
remarkable prematurity of general sexual development, both of these
conflicting with the age and the development of the girls in other
respects, Tardieu certainly paid especial attention to the physical
peculiarities of the genital organs, and he was inclined to refer the
premature development to the early experience of sexual intercourse. But
it is possible that the real connexion was the reverse of this--and,
indeed, many other observations support such a view--in that owing to
their sexual prematurity the children experienced a powerful sexual
impulse at an unusually early age, and that for this reason they became
the victims of sexual attempts much earlier than others. Kisch[97] also
believes that in many cases of premature puberty, premature sexual
intercourse is observed, and parturition may even occur at a very early
age. He writes: "A girl in whom menstruation began at the age of one
year, gave birth to a child when she was ten years old (Montgomery). A
girl who began to menstruate when at the age of nine years, became
pregnant very shortly afterwards (d'Outreport). The well-known case
recorded by Haller, in which at birth the pubic hair was already grown,
and in which menstruation began at the age of two years, was also one of
very early pregnancy, the girl giving birth to a child when nine years
old. Another girl in whom at birth the pubes were already covered with
hair began to menstruate when four years old, copulated regularly from
the age of eight, and at nine years became pregnant, and was delivered
of a vesicular mole with an embryo (Molitor). A girl began to menstruate
at the age of two, had a growth of hair on the pubes and developed mammae
at the age of three, and became pregnant at the age of eight (Carus).
With these cases must be classed that observed by Martin in America of a
woman who was a grandmother at the age of twenty-six. Lantier, in his
travels in Greece, speaks of a mother of twenty-five with a daughter of
thirteen."

Whatever the real sequence of events--whether in a little girl the
occurrence of sexual intercourse is favoured by the spontaneous
premature awakening of the sexual impulse, or, conversely, it is the
premature intercourse which awakens the impulse and keeps it active
thereafter--the consequences of premature awakening of the sexual
impulse are always extremely serious, and often result in the permanent
social extinction of the girl concerned. Although in many cases she may
be fortunate enough to escape the fate of the prostitute, none the less
in modern civilised countries the loss of virginity is a serious
disgrace, by which her future will be affected altogether apart from the
moral shocks resulting from sexual intercourse in early childhood, and
from the possibility of impregnation. The case is much the same as
regards children of the male sex. The fact that a boy is sexually
precocious, will greatly facilitate his being led astray by grown
females to whom his extreme youth acts as a stimulus. Moreover, his
sexual precocity may deliver the boy to the embraces of homosexual men,
an outcome which is rendered the more likely by the commonly
undifferentiated character of the childish sexual impulse. There are
certain homosexual adult males whose impulse is especially directed
towards boys still possessing the milk-white face of the child, and his
encounter with such a pervert may make all the difference to a sexually
premature boy. Although I have been engaged for years in the collection
of facts bearing on this question of homosexuality, I have recently been
astonished to learn, in an ever-increasing number of cases, how adult
homosexuals, men of thirty years and upwards, form homosexual
relationships with schoolboys, and regard their right to do this as
practically self-evident. It is obvious that this is likely to do grave
moral injury to the boy--altogether apart from the fact that the
production of homosexuality is thereby greatly facilitated, however much
interested homosexuals may contest this assertion. It is clear, too,
that boys upon whom such relationships are imposed will sometimes tend
to grow up as male prostitutes, just in the same way as little girls
prematurely seduced in consequence of an early awakening of sexuality
often adopt a life of prostitution.

Children in whom sexuality has awakened are especially dangerous to
their associates, since they readily seduce others to sexual
malpractices. Thus, it sometimes happens, though happily not often, that
children attempt sexual intercourse with one another. A question in
forensic medicine formerly much discussed, is the age at which children
are first able to effect sexual intercourse. I have no doubt whatever
that by the end of the second period of childhood, in a comparatively
large number of boys, spontaneous erections occur adequate to allow the
introduction of the penis into the vagina to be effected; but no doubt
it might be difficult for such a boy to effect complete penetration into
the vagina of a girl in whom the hymen was still intact. Pouillet[98]
even asserts that all boys have the faculty of erection in quite early
childhood; and he places on record the following experiment, whose
repetition had better be avoided. If in an infant lying in its cradle
the edge of the foreskin be tickled with a feather, we shall at once see
the penis swell up and become erect, and the infant will grasp at it
with the hand. There is no doubt that boys in whom the sexual impulse
is prematurely awakened may be a danger to little girls through
attempting intercourse with them. More frequently, however, the danger
lies, not in attempts at coitus, but in other improper manipulations and
contacts, which may take almost every conceivable form. Mutual
masturbation is fairly common among children, or one child may
manipulate the genitals of another; such practices occur more often
between two boys than between two girls or between boy and girl. But
experience shows that other and more advanced sexual acts may occur,
though fortunately less often; for instance, paederastic acts between
boys, introduction of the penis of one individual into the mouth of
another, &c. Ferriani[99] has collected a number of cases of this kind,
occurring in youthful criminals. In boys he distinguishes two groups,
those from the tenth to the fourteenth, and those from the fourteenth to
the eighteenth year of life. He made inquiries regarding the sexual life
in 69 boys belonging to the former group, and in 48 belonging to the
latter. Of the 69 belonging to the former group, 48 were found to
masturbate, in 25 improper sexual acts with the mouth were admitted, in
12 active paederasty, and in 17 passive paederasty. It is evident that
these data must not be generalised, for Ferriani's studies related to
boys who had been morally neglected from the earliest days of childhood,
and who had been sent to prison as thieves, beggars, and vagabonds. A
great danger attendant on sexual acts in which one child is led astray
by another is, of course, the moral harm which threatens the other
associates of such children. Girls and boys are equally exposed to such
seduction, and the seducer also may be of either sex. In cases of an
altogether exceptional character, danger threatens in this respect from
a child's own brothers or sisters. I alluded to this matter in an
earlier chapter, on page 71. Among cases which have come under my
notice, I may mention one in which a boy began to carry out all kinds of
perverse sexual acts with his sister, who was about eight years younger
than himself, and continued to do this when he had attained the age of
twenty-nine years. Forel[100] sees, rightly, as I believe, especial
danger in the leading of others astray by young homosexuals, alike in
boys' and in girls' boarding-schools. In some of these cases the
seducer's act is merely a manifestation of the early undifferentiated
state of the sexual impulse, but in others it is an early sign of a real
homosexual development.

I append here certain cases from the literature of the subject showing
the great dangers that proceed from such premature sexual development.
One case reported by Forel[101] was that of a girl nine years of age.
"This girl would stimulate sexually all boys of her own age or somewhat
younger whom she could induce to allow her to do so. She did this so
secretly, that by mishandling the genital organs of her two little
brothers, both younger than herself, she slowly brought one to his
death, and in the other caused serious injury to the bladder and
urethra. With an older boy, she was accustomed to have actual sexual
intercourse in the woods. I could not, in this case, gain any definite
information regarding hereditary taint. Such persons commonly become
criminals in later life, or at least indulge in the most shameless
masturbation or give themselves up to prostitution."

A case which at one time attracted great attention in France may here be
given in the actual words of the report. "Leo, thirteen years old,
demanded the favours of eleven little girls, offering in return, as the
girls confessed, a small reward--a penny or a sweet. Many others must
have been compelled by their parents to make no complaint, in order to
avoid a mortifying publicity. Leo is the son of a good fellow, a
shoemaker by trade, and also a lamplighter. The mother having run away,
and the father being often out at work, the boy was left much alone. He
would then entice into the house little girls of the neighbourhood, one
after another, in order to commit immoral acts with them. One day he
invited in a little girl of five. The girl's brother peeped through the
window, and saw Leo standing naked in front of Mary, as if he _posait
pour le torse_. Ultimately the matter was reported to the police
superintendent of the district, and it transpired that not less than
ten or eleven little girls of the quarter had been thus led astray. From
time to time he invited into the house a number of good-for-nothings of
the same stamp as himself, and here this youthful Casanova organised
pleasure-parties of a kind usually unknown to those of his age. The lad
was bound over to come up for trial if called upon. Such cases as this
are commoner than is generally believed; and perhaps commoner in the
country than in the town."

The way in which such practices spread by moral contagion is shown by a
report of Ferriani,[102] who made inquiries of nine boys, at ages
varying between eight and twelve years, how they had learned to
masturbate. I. had been taught by a certain K., II. by I., III. by IV.,
IV. by I., V. by II., VI. by III., VII. by IV., VIII. by VI., IX. by II.
Not long ago, I myself came across such an epidemic, in which there
occurred, not only masturbation, but, in addition, all sorts of mutual
sexual contacts between boys and girls; a boy of five was the primary
seducer, having undertaken the sexual enlightenment of a girl of seven,
and beginning this process with the remark that she need no longer
believe that babies were brought by a stork. These two went on to
improper contact, and subsequently quite a number of children were
gradually corrupted by the two.

To the jurist, also, the question of the sexual life of the child is one
of great importance. I do not myself share the view of Ferriani and
others, that the sexual life of the child, when it awakes prematurely,
is a common cause of crime--although this may be true of certain special
cases, presently to be described. But the sexual life of the child is of
importance from another point of view. In cases in which children are
the objects of sexual offences, such as have recently so often come
before the courts, the question of the capacity of the children to give
evidence frequently plays a great part. The lawyer, who is often
ignorant of the extent to which sexual imaginations and sexual acts may
prevail among children, is apt to assume that the child is of necessity
sexually inexperienced, and for this reason to put a trust in childish
evidence which is in many instances not justified by the facts of the
case, because the supposed inexperience may not really exist. If judges
and magistrates knew how much and how often children's brains are
occupied with sexual imaginations, without speaking of the sexual acts
which many children have engaged in while still quite young, they would
be more guarded than they are at present in their acceptance of
children's evidence in sexual matters. Not infrequently, when such a
child describes the sexual offence which is supposed to have been
committed, it is assumed without further inquiry that the child's
account must be accurate, the grounds for this assumption being stated
as follows: "How could such an accusation be invented? The poor child
has had no previous experience of such matters; what is now described
must have actually happened, for it is impossible that an inexperienced
child could construct it all out of its own imagination." But to anyone
who has seriously studied the sexual life of the child, this logic is
utterly fallacious. Still, the argument is none the less a very
dangerous one; and as an expert witness I have assisted at several
trials as to which I remain convinced to this day that the judge has
assumed the offender to be guilty simply because he (the judge) was
ignorant of the nature of the sexual life of the child, above all as
regards psychosexual imaginations. Some years ago there was tried in
Berlin a case in which a wealthy banker was accused of misconduct with a
little girl. In the end the accused received a severe sentence. In that
trial I was called as an expert witness, and I believe that as regards
the principal charge the banker was wrongfully condemned. The principal
witness was a girl twelve years of age, and it was her accusation which
formed the main ground of the conviction, and this notwithstanding the
fact that the child had subsequently withdrawn her charges. In common
with other expert witnesses, I pointed out, in rebuttal of the girl's
evidence, that the person on whom the alleged offence had been committed
was not, as the police magistrate and the judge had both assumed, an
inexperienced child, but one in whom sexuality had prematurely awakened,
and in whom strongly sensual tendencies were manifest; we showed that in
her imaginative activities the sexual life played a leading part, and
that the child herself had at an earlier date performed some of the
actions with which she charged the accused. But the child had made so
favourable an impression on the police magistrate and the judge that
they firmly believed her first statement, and held that her subsequent
withdrawal of her accusation was due to outside influence. It would be
well, in some cases of the kind, to insist upon a complete examination
of the girl who makes the accusation, this examination to include her
bodily state, to ascertain if there are indications of a prematurely
awakened sexual life--for example, any irritation of the genital organs
by masturbation. We shall also do well, in such cases, to endeavour to
ascertain whether the child is already fully informed concerning the
nature of sex. We must always bear in mind that things which may give an
indication regarding this are usually kept very secret, and that none of
the child's associates may be able to give us any information. Even
though among the witnesses we have parents, masters, or governesses all
uniting to assure us that the child's mind is still perfectly innocent,
and that not a suspicion regarding matters of sex has yet been aroused,
the judge should not allow himself to be deceived. Sexual imaginations
often dominate the consciousness of the child, at the very time when a
display of shamefacedness in relation to such things deceives the
onlookers. In such trials, it is sometimes put forward as a defence,
that some third person, some police official, the examining judge, or
even an enemy of the accused, has reiterated the false accusation to the
child, and has, as it were, suggested it. Such an assumption is, for
many cases, altogether superfluous, even if we do not believe a word of
the child's accusation, for it completely underestimates the power of
the childish imagination. The French physician, Bourdin,[103] in his
work on _Lying Children_, gives the case of a little girl who by her
good behaviour and affectionate disposition had won the love of her
foster-parents. One day they were reading aloud the report of a
scandalous trial, while the child was in the room playing with her
dolls, and to all appearance paying no attention to the reading. A few
days later the foster-parents saw the little girl putting her dolls
together in an indecent posture. In answer to earnest inquiries, the
child said she was only doing what someone had once done to her; she
then went on to make detailed and serious accusations against certain
other persons. A clever and experienced physician was asked to
investigate the matter before any application was made to the law
courts. As a result of a physical examination of the girl, he declared
that what she described could not possibly have taken place; and
ultimately she admitted that the whole accusation was false. As a reason
for her lies, she said, "qu'elle avait voulu faire comme les dames que
l'on avait mises dans le journal." Such imaginative activity may occur
in healthy children, but it is in the case of those with a morbid
inheritance that we have especially to reckon with these possibilities.
As with the grown woman, so with the child, the degenerative form of
hysteria makes those subject to it untrustworthy witnesses. This applies
above all to accusations of sexual offences. Feeble-mindedness is also
dangerous in this connexion, for its existence is apt to be overlooked
by the judge, although an expert examination of the witness--who, in
most of these cases, is of the female sex--would facilitate the
diagnosis. Among the feeble-minded, we find, not only sexually premature
individuals, but also persons with a tendency to pathological deceit,
this latter sometimes manifesting itself in childhood, and of course
lessening or completely abolishing the subject's credibility as a
witness to the occurrence of alleged sexual offences.

These considerations must not lead us to the opposite extreme, of
altogether discrediting the assertions of child-witnesses; but they
should convince us of the need for the recognition of a source of
fallacy often completely overlooked by parents, namely, the indulgence
by children in sexual imaginative activity, and the frequent existence
of unsuspected sexual enlightenment. To this extent only do such
questions form part of my subject. Following Hans Gross, I have on page
41 already drawn attention to the fact that girls of a certain age are
untrustworthy witnesses regarding their own _experiences._ But to guard
against too comprehensive a generalisation in this respect, I must
point out that during the second period of childhood a girl may be a
highly competent observer, and this precisely for matters in which her
interest has been aroused by the development of her sexual life. I may
quote from Hans Gross certain remarks bearing on this.[104] "We have to
recognise that in the observation and understanding of certain matters,
there is no one cleverer than a growing girl. Her school-life, and her
personal experiences and occupations, do not adequately occupy her
energies. Sexual influences are beginning to become active, and
half-unconsciously the girl studies her environment in search of
experiences bearing, however remotely, on this sphere. The little
interests and amours of the nearer and further environment will be by no
one discovered so speedily as by a bright and lively half-grown girl.
Every variation in the mutual interest of the pair she has under
observation will be noted by such a girl with the keenest sympathy. Long
before the two have come to an understanding, she will be aware of their
sentiments for one another. She notes when they are drawing nearer
together, and she knows at once when they have given open expression to
their love. Whether they become engaged or whether they draw apart from
one another, the little one knows all about it before any of their
intimates. Moreover, such a girl will take note of all the doings of
certain of her acquaintances. An interesting beauty, or a young man
living near at hand, will have no more watchful observer of all their
doings than a young girl of twelve years. She, too, will take note more
accurately than anyone else of all the changes of mood of those who are
under her observation."

But the sexual life of children is of importance, not only in relation
to the question of their credibility as witnesses, but also in respect
of our decision as to matters of fact. Sexual attempts on children under
fourteen years of age are legally punishable offences, and it is a
matter of indifference whether the offender or the child was the
instigator. In determining the degree of culpability it is, however, of
important whether the child against whom the offence has been committed
was innocent and uncorrupted, or was one with previous sexual
experiences. In addition to this, we have also to take into account the
question whether the child incited to the offence, under the influence
of the spontaneous activity of its own sexual impulse. All these
considerations will make it clear that from many points of view the
sexual life of the child is a matter of forensic importance.

We must not forget that the child itself may be threatened with legal
dangers as a result of the activity of its own sexual impulse. The
German legal code decrees different degrees of penal responsibility at
different ages. Children not yet twelve years of age are not liable to
criminal prosecution. A child over twelve, but under eighteen years of
age, must be exonerated if when the offence was committed the child did
not possess the knowledge enabling him or her to understand its
culpability. By the third paragraph of section 176 of the German
criminal code, any one who has improper sexual relations with a person
under fourteen years of age, or who induces such a person to practise or
suffer such relations, is liable to severe punishment.

If, therefore, two children of eleven engage in mutual misconduct, they
incur no liability to legal punishment. But two boys of thirteen are
liable to prosecution for the practice of mutual masturbation. Each of
them has performed an improper act with a child under fourteen years of
age, and the liability to punishment in each case depends upon the
answer to the question whether the offender possessed sufficient
knowledge to enable him to understand his culpability. This knowledge is
not identical with the knowledge that the offence was legally
punishable; that is to say, either boy would be liable to punishment,
even though he had no idea whatever that improper sexual relations with
children under fourteen constituted an offence against the law. All that
is necessary is that he should possess a sufficient degree of
intelligence to understand his culpability, which is quite another thing
from his possessing knowledge of his legal liability to punishment.
Generally speaking, however, the public prosecutor is disinclined to
initiate proceedings in such cases, for the most part because it is
held that the necessary understanding of culpability is commonly
lacking. But such prosecutions have more than once occurred. In the year
1899, in a little town in the Mark of Brandenburg, proceedings were
taken against eighteen school-children, boys and girls, and five
pupil-teachers. These twenty-three persons, who appeared in the dock,
had all reached an age at which they became liable to criminal
prosecution; in the case of a number of other boys and girls who were
concerned in the affair, no prosecution could take place. Ultimately,
all the accused were discharged, as it was held that when the offence
was committed they did not possess the requisite understanding of its
culpable character. But by order of the court several of the accused
were transferred to a reformatory. Since a prosecution may take place in
such cases, a conviction is also possible. It is evident that as soon as
a child is twelve years old, it may incur legal liabilities in
consequence of the activity of the sexual impulse.

We must not overlook the fact that the intellectual side of development
may be influenced by an early awakening of the sexual life, the child
inclining, in this case, to occupy its mind with sexual thoughts, to the
neglect of educational opportunities. I have seen cases which were
regarded as instances of aprosexia,[105] the lack of the power of
concentration being attributed to adenoid vegetations, but in which the
defect might, with at least as much reason, have been referred to the
play of sexual ideas. To the teacher, his pupil's inattentiveness is
often an insoluble riddle, merely because he ignores in the child the
play of erotic imagination, and, in fact, ignores the child's inner life
in general. And yet, in such cases, the child's failure to attend to the
work of the class sometimes depends upon nothing more than occupation
with thoughts about a beloved person. In other instances, the
inattention is due, not to sexual ideas, but to sexual acts. As a
patient of my own put the matter: in boyhood, while in the Latin class
he was supposed to be learning his _amo, amas, amat_, he and his
school-fellows were studying the subject practically beneath the table.
Naturally, the stronger the child's sexual impulse, the more will the
attention wander; and although in most cases, in children, the impulse
is comparatively weak, in isolated instances it may from the first be
abnormally powerful, entailing dangers to the intellectual development
as serious as those other dangers previously enumerated. According to
Sanford Bell, unfavourable consequences to intellectual development
cannot, as a general rule, be attributed to the early amatory
inclinations of childhood. All that is likely to be noticed is that on
days when the child loved by another is away from school, the latter
child will be less attentive than usual. But the circumstances are
somewhat different when the object of affection is not a school-fellow.
Bell speaks only of cases in which the child-lovers are members of the
same class, and he refers to heterosexual inclinations only. In such
cases, the results of early amatory inclinations may even be good.
Hebbel relates of himself, how zealously as a little boy he attended
school, simply in order to meet in the class the girl he loved. The
presence of the loved one may, in fact, powerfully stimulate ambition
and the desire to work. A little girl who has fallen in love with her
schoolmistress or governess, will strive to please the latter by hard
work and attention; and, similarly, a boy who loves a boy or a girl
classmate, very often attempts to make an impression on the feelings of
the loved one by his performances at school. Whilst we recognise the
dangers attendant on the development of sexuality in the child, we must
not overlook the fact that this development may have its good side.

For, just in the same way, a child's altruistic feelings may be
stimulated by love. We see cases in which a child tries to help the
beloved schoolmate in every possible difficulty or trouble. Such a love
may also spur the lover on to excellence in other fields than the mere
work of the class. The boy, while still quite young, seeks to make an
impression on the girl by courage and steadfastness, just as he will
seek to do this somewhat later, when he has attained early manhood.

A spirited description is given by Gruenstein of boys engaged in a sham
fight. At first the contending parties are timorous, appearing afraid of
one another:--

  "But when the girls draw near, to view
     The slaughter of a stricken plain,
   In mimic battle, at this cue,
     The boys now join with might and main.

   Under the spell of girlish eyes
     Each strives his courage to display;
   For wounds or death he may despise,
     Who helps his side to win the day.

   And as the factions join in strife,
     They shout amid the battle's din;
   Fighting as if for very life,
     Each one will do his best to win.

   Each hopes the victory to gain;
     Each would the bravest warrior prove.
   Hurrah! they cry, and each is fain
     To win bright glances from his love."

As I have previously explained, the existence of sexual perversions may
sometimes be traced back into early childhood, although, in individual
cases, the experiences of childhood may throw little light on the
subsequent sexual life. But we saw that cases certainly occur in which
the abnormal tendencies of the sexual life are manifested in early
childhood, and in which, also, other tendencies of childhood are
determined by the abnormal sexual life. In such cases, the mental life
of the child is also profoundly affected. Such a child feels unhappy on
account of its abnormal sexual relationships. The boy would rather have
been a girl, the girl a boy. In such a case, the choice of a future
profession will also be affected by mental peculiarities closely
associated with the sexual life. The homosexual ladies' tailor, the
music-hall artiste who makes a speciality of feminine impersonations,
the ladies' hairdresser, and others in like occupations, will often tell
us that the choice of their trade or profession was made while they were
still children. In this connexion, I may also refer to the sexual life
of Catholic priests. It is certain that some of these exhibit homosexual
tendencies. It is often suggested that it is their repulsion from
heterosexual intercourse which leads such men to take the Catholic vow
of celibacy. But there is another possible factor which must not be
overlooked. It is not unlikely that certain persons, not homosexual, but
in whom sexual inclination towards women is primarily wanting, may
incline to enter the priesthood. Yet another possibility is pointed out
by a Catholic priest who has written on this subject. He is of opinion
that homosexually inclined boys often exhibit even in childhood
caressive tendencies; such boys early attract the attention of priests,
who make use of them in the performance of various ecclesiastical
ceremonies. For this reason, such boys come under the influence of the
priesthood at an exceptionally early age; and thus it comes about that
in an exceptionally large proportion of cases they themselves enter the
priesthood.

There are other sexual perversions, in addition to those just mentioned,
by which the inclinations and occupations of the child may be
influenced. A hair-fetichist, whose case I had occasion to study
carefully when, at the age of fifteen, he had to stand his trial on
account of cutting off girls' plaits of hair, informed me that for one
or two years before he first committed this offence, he had experienced
a peculiar stimulus whenever he handled hair. In other cases of
fetichism which I have had under observation, the abnormal fetichistic
tendency went much further back. An underclothing fetichist began at the
age of seven to be greatly interested in his sister's and in the
maidservant's underclothing, touching such articles of clothing as often
as he could, and pressing up against them in a caressing way. The choice
of reading is sometimes determined by perverse sensibilities, the sexual
nature of which may often not become apparent until a considerable
period has elapsed. I know certain persons with masochistic and with
sadistic tendencies, who in childhood preferred to read stories about
robbers and slaves, the use of fetters and the descriptions of violence
of all kinds playing a peculiar part in their imaginations. It must be
regarded as definitely established that children sometimes deliberately
incur corporal punishment in order to enjoy masochistic sexual
sensations. The best-known instance is that of Jean Jacques Rousseau,
who at _the age of seven_ was chastised by Mademoiselle Lambercier, and
thereupon experienced agreeable sensual feelings. He himself tells
us[106] how sincere was his affection for Mademoiselle Lambercier, and
his extremely tractable disposition would have tended to prevent his
deliberately seeking to commit an improper act. And yet in spite of this
the chastisement was repeated, and again he experienced a secret
stimulation. In a little erotic work of the eighteenth century, _Le
Joujou des Demoiselles_, we find under the heading of "Le Fouet" ("A
Whipping"), the following short poem, relating to a girl twelve years of
age:--


  "A l'age de douze ans, pour certain grave cas,
         Que je sais et ne dirai pas,
         Lise du fouet fut menacee
   A sa maman, justement courroucee,

         Lise repondit fierement,
         Vous avez tout lieu de vous plaindre,
         Mais pour le fouet tout doucement,
   Je suis d'age a l'aimer et non pas a le craindre.

   At the age of twelve, for a good reason,
         Which I know, but will not tell,
         Lise was threatened with a whipping.
   To her mother, justly incensed,

         Lise answered proudly,
         You have just cause of complaint,
         But as regards a moderate whipping,
   I am of an age to enjoy and not to fear it."

The awakening of sex has further effects upon the mental life of the
child. Its curiosity is aroused, as soon as the phenomena of pubescence
make their appearance, either in themselves or in other children. Long
before this, as a rule, the navel has to the child been an object of
curiosity. This part of the body seems strange and perplexing, and even
in early childhood the genital organs may inspire similar sentiments.
The child observes that in respect of such things some reserve is the
rule, that a certain shyness is manifested in looking at and touching
the genital organs, and for these very reasons the child's attention is
apt to be directed to these organs. But curiosity becomes much keener
when the signs of puberty manifest themselves. To many a child, the
looking-glass serves as a means for the thorough observation of these
remarkable signs of development. With amazement the child watches the
growth of the axillary and the pubic hair; and in girls attention is
aroused by the enlargement of the breasts. Curiosity then leads the
child to seek information about these things from various books, and
especially from an encyclopaedia. It is a matter of general experience
that the article on Masturbation is eagerly studied by many children,
even before the end of the second period of childhood. A search is made
for anatomical illustrations, in order to see the genital organs of both
sexes. In many cases brothers and sisters arrange to satisfy one
another's curiosity on this point. Elder brother and younger, elder
sister and younger, or brother and sister will often seek to enlighten
one another as to differences in bodily structure, especially as regards
the external genital organs, by means of mutual inspection. Such
childish curiosity may be, and often is, altogether independent of the
awakening of the sexual life; the real motive is then the rationalist
one, if the expression be permitted. But in other instances the
curiosity is determined, or increased, by the awakening of the sexual
life. Similar considerations apply to the observation of the sexual acts
of animals, for which opportunities occur more especially in the
country, but sometimes also in the town; in most cases, the motive for
such observation in the first instance is pure curiosity, independent of
sexual processes in the child. Parents who surprise their children thus
engaged, usually regard such investigations as signs of gross
immorality; but it is unnecessary to take so tragic a view. It is simply
childish curiosity, on the part of those who see nothing wrong in what
they are doing. That which is immoral in the adult is not necessarily
immoral in the child, who is merely led by curiosity, and by his
astonishment at the changes taking place in his body, to study these
changes closely. It is not immoral for a child to wish to study _in
propria persona_ matters about which information has been withheld.
Adults are far too ready to interpret the actions of children in the
light of their own feelings--a mistake which cannot be too strongly
condemned.

The curiosity of the child about his own body is often intermingled
with fear; above all in the perfectly innocent, completely unenlightened
child, the first seminal emission, whether it occurs during sleep or in
the waking hours, and in the girl, the first appearance of the menstrual
flow, may readily cause serious alarm. It must not be supposed that such
alarm is of rare occurrence. Even in large towns, which our moralists
are apt to regard as altogether corrupt, we sometimes find that a boy of
fifteen or sixteen may be greatly alarmed, on waking, to discover that
he has had a seminal emission, for which he has been prepared neither by
experience nor by instruction.

Additional wider influences of the sexual life of the child cannot here
be fully discussed. But when we see that in great poets and other
artists much of their creative work may be effected in childhood, and
when, on the other hand, we observe the connexion of many artistic
productions with the psychosexual sphere, we cannot fail to admit the
possibility that the sexual life of the child is to some extent related
to art. Thus, we sometimes see children endeavouring, however
imperfectly, to express their feelings in verse; and in cases in which
nothing of the kind occurs, the erotic feelings of childhood may still
exercise influence later in life. As examples from world-literature, I
may mention: Heine, who was still a boy when he was so greatly attracted
by his Sefchen, the executioner's niece, whose personality made a
definite impression on the poet's maturer work;[107] Goethe, whose
friendship with the sister of the little Derones, likewise had certain
artistic results; Dante, who first met his Beatrice at the age of nine
years, and ever thenceforward remained under her spell. If in such cases
we inquire as to the impressions of childhood, we unquestionably find,
in poets and artists, traces, sometimes of direct, but more frequently
of indirect influences.

Mantegazza[108] goes so far as to regard the premature development of
psychosexual sentiments as a peculiarity of richly endowed and talented
natures. An obscure, shamefaced feeling, by which the boy is drawn to
the girl, is, he thinks, manifest in such natures, even before sex has
made its profound impression upon the developing organism, and before
the reproductive organs have assumed their adult forms. He compares such
feelings with the rosy tint which appears on the horizon before the
sunrise, and he considers that in men of a lower type or less highly
gifted by nature, the new sentiments known by the name of love do not
appear until after the adult development of the reproductive organs. I
do not believe that this generalisation is well founded; although, as
previously mentioned, I consider that the alarm which is often caused in
elders by the appearance in the child of such early psychosexual
manifestations is not warranted, as a rule, by the facts of the case.

The question as to the quality of the offspring resulting from the
sexual intercourse of children, either of two children who are both
sexually mature, or of a sexually mature child with a grown person, has
not, in Europe, any great or immediate practical interest. With us,
procreation is rarely possible on the part of those who are still
children, for the boy is hardly competent for procreation before the
completion of the second period of childhood, and in the case of girls
such competence is rarely met with till towards the very end of the
second period of childhood. But if we put the question in a somewhat
more general form, and study the quality of the offspring of youthful
persons in whom bodily development is not yet fully completed, the
matter becomes one of greater practical interest. But for a decision
even on this point, data are insufficient, notwithstanding the fact
that, according to Pauline Tarnowsky,[109] among the Russians a young
girl frequently marries while still sexually immature, at the age of
sixteen or seventeen, when, in that country, menstruation has often not
yet begun. But there is a country from which data bearing on this
problem can be obtained--data of considerable, and, as some think, of
decisive importance--viz. India. In India, child-marriages occur with
extraordinary frequency, and, according to Hans Fehlinger,[110] their
number continues to increase. Originally almost confined to the Hindus,
these marriages have spread to the Mohammedans, the Buddhists, and the
Animists, notwithstanding the fact that religious reasons for such
marriages exist only in the case of the Hindus. In the year 1881, for
every 1000 persons under 10 years of age, 99 were married, of these 24
being boys, and 75 girls. In the year 1901, the number of married
persons under 10 years of age was 158 per 1000, of whom 20 were children
under 5 years old. This is an enormous percentage: and although
Fehlinger himself draws attention to the fact that marriage in childhood
is not always tantamount to the beginning of sexual intercourse, since
in many cases years will intervene between marriage and the commencement
of cohabitation, yet in many other instances no such interval exists. E.
Ruedin[111] also deals with the question of child-marriages in India,
discussing it from the point of view of racial degeneration. He states
that, with one exception, modern writers are agreed that the
consequences of the Indian custom of child-marriage are altogether
bad--that not a single point can be urged in favour of the practice. The
solitary writer to urge anything in favour of the custom of
child-marriage is Sir Denzil Ibbetsson, who asserts that in the Western
Punjab, where child-marriages are exceptional, immorality and assaults
upon women are commoner than in the Eastern Punjab, where
child-marriages are the rule. Those who strongly disapprove of
child-marriages, point more particularly to the fact that when a
girl-child is married to an adult man, she often receives mechanical
injuries in the act of intercourse; and they contend, in addition, that
child-marriage is injurious to the offspring. For, by child-marriage, we
obviate any possibility of sexual selection within the limits of a
particular caste, inasmuch as persons are bound together in marriage
whose defective constitution and inferior mental endowments may not
become apparent until long after marriage, and yet the couple, tied to
one another for life, will continue to procreate an inferior stock. But,
in this connexion, it must not be forgotten that in India puberty is
attained far earlier in life than it is in Western Europe.

Having dealt with the premature development of the sexual life, a few
words must now be allotted to the consideration of an abnormally late
awakening of sexuality. This latter phenomenon must, unquestionably, be
regarded as a morbid manifestation. In the course of my experience, I
have seen quite a number of people in whom the sexual impulse made its
first appearance very late; in childhood, and also later, some of these
were regarded by their associates as models of chastity. They had no
intercourse with prostitutes, because even at the age of twenty they had
not yet experienced any definite sexual impulse. They despised other
young men who practised irregular sexual intercourse, and they
themselves had no difficulty in refraining from such intercourse. But
many such persons are the subjects of a remarkable self-deception; for a
long time they really believe themselves to be exceptionally moral, and
succeed in convincing themselves that their abstinence from sexual
intercourse is dependent upon ethical motives, whereas often the real
reason has merely been the lack of inclination and of capacity for
sexual intercourse. In most cases the real nature of the case
subsequently becomes clear to them, and they come to understand that
their previous sexual abstinence was not determined by ethical motives.
When we analyse such cases more accurately, we often find that we have
to do with abnormal individualities; abnormal not merely in respect of
the retarded development of the sexual life, but also as regards other
phenomena. Not infrequently we have to do with neuropathic and
psychopathic natures, and the reality of this is quite unaffected by the
fact that the superficial observer is convinced that such persons are
exceptionally moral. I possess a considerable number of autobiographical
case-histories of this kind, and it is quite usual to find that they
state that their associates have wrongly accredited them with peculiar
virtue, whereas in reality their apparently irreproachable conduct
depended simply upon abnormality of development, and the strict morality
was an illusive appearance. Many of them also produce an altogether
unmanly, effeminate, bashful, and timid impression. Although I have
always honoured, and continue to hold in honour, those young men who
avoid illegitimate sexual intercourse on genuinely moral grounds, the
persons exhibiting the peculiarities just explained must be regarded as
pathological subjects. If our moralists hold up to us as exemplary
specimens such young men as these, we have to answer that in that case
sexual abstinence, and also chastity and morality, may depend upon a
pathological inheritance. Just as we are unable to regard eunuchs as
exceptionally virtuous individuals, so also must we be cautious in our
assignment of moral motives for the sexual abstinence of young men of
this nature.[112]

In the female sex, also, there are persons in whom the sexual life, and
especially the sexual impulse, awakens very late. This may happen
notwithstanding the fact that menstruation has begun at the normal age.
Both the peripheral phenomena of detumescence, and also the phenomena of
contrectation, may be thus retarded; and the former especially may
permanently fail to appear. We see girls who appear remarkably virtuous,
because, while other girls are rejoicing at having found an admirer,
they pass coldly along, in the streets and elsewhere, their eyes
directed forwards, and rigidly avoid exchanging glances with any male
person. Although this delayed sexual development does not arouse in us
the same unsympathetic feelings in the case of young women as it does in
the case of young men, it is none the less necessary to recognise the
phenomenon in the female sex as well, and this not on medical grounds
merely, but also on educational, ethical, and social grounds. In fine,
in such cases, we have to do with something very different from cases in
which from a true sense of shame or on moral grounds a girl maintains
her mental and bodily chastity; different, also, from the cases in which
we have to do with women whose bodily development is normal, but who in
other respects resemble rather the type of those in whom the
reproductive glands have been removed.

I may take this opportunity of insisting upon the fact that the unduly
retarded awakening of the sexual life, or the complete failure of the
sexual impulse to appear, is not especially to be desired, and entails
dangers and disadvantages just as does a premature development of
sexuality. I may recall, in this connexion, certain earlier experiences.
At one time it was assumed that there was a mental disorder known as
pyromania; the pyromaniac was one with an irresistible impulse to light
incendiary fires. To-day, we no longer admit the existence of any such
disease, and the impulse to light incendiary fires, when such a morbid
impulse manifests itself, is regarded as a symptom of imbecility, of
cerebral degeneration, &c. But we may take this opportunity of reminding
the reader that Henke,[113] an earlier investigator, regarded pyromania
as due chiefly to arrest or disturbance of the physical and psychical
phenomena of puberty. Esquirol himself appears to have shared this
opinion; and although modern psychiatry takes quite a different view of
pyromania, we have none the less to insist that unduly retarded
development may, just as much as premature development, give rise to
undesirable consequences.



