
CHAPTER III Of the Ground of the Division of all Objects into Phenomena
and Noumena.

We have now not only traversed the region of the pure understanding and
carefully surveyed every part of it, but we have also measured it, and
assigned to everything therein its proper place. But this land is an
island, and enclosed by nature herself within unchangeable limits. It is
the land of truth (an attractive word), surrounded by a wide and stormy
ocean, the region of illusion, where many a fog-bank, many an iceberg,
seems to the mariner, on his voyage of discovery, a new country, and,
while constantly deluding him with vain hopes, engages him in dangerous
adventures, from which he never can desist, and which yet he never can
bring to a termination. But before venturing upon this sea, in order
to explore it in its whole extent, and to arrive at a certainty whether
anything is to be discovered there, it will not be without advantage if
we cast our eyes upon the chart of the land that we are about to
leave, and to ask ourselves, firstly, whether we cannot rest perfectly
contented with what it contains, or whether we must not of necessity
be contented with it, if we can find nowhere else a solid foundation to
build upon; and, secondly, by what title we possess this land itself,
and how we hold it secure against all hostile claims? Although, in the
course of our analytic, we have already given sufficient answers to
these questions, yet a summary recapitulation of these solutions may
be useful in strengthening our conviction, by uniting in one point the
momenta of the arguments.

We have seen that everything which the understanding draws from itself,
without borrowing from experience, it nevertheless possesses only
for the behoof and use of experience. The principles of the pure
understanding, whether constitutive a priori (as the mathematical
principles), or merely regulative (as the dynamical), contain nothing
but the pure schema, as it were, of possible experience. For experience
possesses its unity from the synthetical unity which the understanding,
originally and from itself, imparts to the synthesis of the imagination
in relation to apperception, and in a priori relation to and agreement
with which phenomena, as data for a possible cognition, must stand. But
although these rules of the understanding are not only a priori true,
but the very source of all truth, that is, of the accordance of our
cognition with objects, and on this ground, that they contain the basis
of the possibility of experience, as the ensemble of all cognition, it
seems to us not enough to propound what is true--we desire also to
be told what we want to know. If, then, we learn nothing more by this
critical examination than what we should have practised in the merely
empirical use of the understanding, without any such subtle inquiry,
the presumption is that the advantage we reap from it is not worth
the labour bestowed upon it. It may certainly be answered that no rash
curiosity is more prejudicial to the enlargement of our knowledge than
that which must know beforehand the utility of this or that piece
of information which we seek, before we have entered on the needful
investigations, and before one could form the least conception of its
utility, even though it were placed before our eyes. But there is
one advantage in such transcendental inquiries which can be made
comprehensible to the dullest and most reluctant learner--this, namely,
that the understanding which is occupied merely with empirical exercise,
and does not reflect on the sources of its own cognition, may exercise
its functions very well and very successfully, but is quite unable to do
one thing, and that of very great importance, to determine, namely,
the bounds that limit its employment, and to know what lies within
or without its own sphere. This purpose can be obtained only by
such profound investigations as we have instituted. But if it cannot
distinguish whether certain questions lie within its horizon or not, it
can never be sure either as to its claims or possessions, but must lay
its account with many humiliating corrections, when it transgresses, as
it unavoidably will, the limits of its own territory, and loses itself
in fanciful opinions and blinding illusions.

That the understanding, therefore, cannot make of its a priori
principles, or even of its conceptions, other than an empirical use,
is a proposition which leads to the most important results. A
transcendental use is made of a conception in a fundamental proposition
or principle, when it is referred to things in general and considered
as things in themselves; an empirical use, when it is referred merely to
phenomena, that is, to objects of a possible experience. That the latter
use of a conception is the only admissible one is evident from the
reasons following. For every conception are requisite, firstly, the
logical form of a conception (of thought) general; and, secondly, the
possibility of presenting to this an object to which it may apply.
Failing this latter, it has no sense, and utterly void of content,
although it may contain the logical function for constructing a
conception from certain data. Now, object cannot be given to a
conception otherwise than by intuition, and, even if a pure intuition
antecedent to the object is a priori possible, this pure intuition can
itself obtain objective validity only from empirical intuition, of which
it is itself but the form. All conceptions, therefore, and with them
all principles, however high the degree of their a priori possibility,
relate to empirical intuitions, that is, to data towards a possible
experience. Without this they possess no objective validity, but are
mere play of imagination or of understanding with images or notions. Let
us take, for example, the conceptions of mathematics, and first in its
pure intuitions. "Space has three dimensions"--"Between two points there
can be only one straight line," etc. Although all these principles,
and the representation of the object with which this science occupies
itself, are generated in the mind entirely a priori, they would
nevertheless have no significance if we were not always able to exhibit
their significance in and by means of phenomena (empirical objects).
Hence it is requisite that an abstract conception be made sensuous,
that is, that an object corresponding to it in intuition be forthcoming,
otherwise the conception remains, as we say, without sense, that
is, without meaning. Mathematics fulfils this requirement by the
construction of the figure, which is a phenomenon evident to the senses.
The same science finds support and significance in number; this in its
turn finds it in the fingers, or in counters, or in lines and points.
The conception itself is always produced a priori, together with the
synthetical principles or formulas from such conceptions; but the proper
employment of them, and their application to objects, can exist nowhere
but in experience, the possibility of which, as regards its form, they
contain a priori.

That this is also the case with all of the categories and the principles
based upon them is evident from the fact that we cannot render
intelligible the possibility of an object corresponding to them without
having recourse to the conditions of sensibility, consequently, to the
form of phenomena, to which, as their only proper objects, their use
must therefore be confined, inasmuch as, if this condition is removed,
all significance, that is, all relation to an object, disappears, and
no example can be found to make it comprehensible what sort of things we
ought to think under such conceptions.

The conception of quantity cannot be explained except by saying that
it is the determination of a thing whereby it can be cogitated how
many times one is placed in it. But this "how many times" is based upon
successive repetition, consequently upon time and the synthesis of the
homogeneous therein. Reality, in contradistinction to negation, can be
explained only by cogitating a time which is either filled therewith or
is void. If I leave out the notion of permanence (which is existence in
all time), there remains in the conception of substance nothing but the
logical notion of subject, a notion of which I endeavour to realize by
representing to myself something that can exist only as a subject. But
not only am I perfectly ignorant of any conditions under which this
logical prerogative can belong to a thing, I can make nothing out of
the notion, and draw no inference from it, because no object to which
to apply the conception is determined, and we consequently do not know
whether it has any meaning at all. In like manner, if I leave out the
notion of time, in which something follows upon some other thing in
conformity with a rule, I can find nothing in the pure category, except
that there is a something of such a sort that from it a conclusion may
be drawn as to the existence of some other thing. But in this case
it would not only be impossible to distinguish between a cause and an
effect, but, as this power to draw conclusions requires conditions of
which I am quite ignorant, the conception is not determined as to the
mode in which it ought to apply to an object. The so-called principle:
"Everything that is contingent has a cause," comes with a gravity and
self-assumed authority that seems to require no support from without.
But, I ask, what is meant by contingent? The answer is that the
non-existence of which is possible. But I should like very well to know
by what means this possibility of non-existence is to be cognized, if we
do not represent to ourselves a succession in the series of phenomena,
and in this succession an existence which follows a non-existence, or
conversely, consequently, change. For to say, that the non-existence
of a thing is not self-contradictory is a lame appeal to a logical
condition, which is no doubt a necessary condition of the existence of
the conception, but is far from being sufficient for the real objective
possibility of non-existence. I can annihilate in thought every existing
substance without self-contradiction, but I cannot infer from this their
objective contingency in existence, that is to say, the possibility of
their non-existence in itself. As regards the category of community,
it may easily be inferred that, as the pure categories of substance and
causality are incapable of a definition and explanation sufficient to
determine their object without the aid of intuition, the category
of reciprocal causality in the relation of substances to each other
(commercium) is just as little susceptible thereof. Possibility,
existence, and necessity nobody has ever yet been able to explain
without being guilty of manifest tautology, when the definition has been
drawn entirely from the pure understanding. For the substitution of the
logical possibility of the conception--the condition of which is that
it be not self-contradictory, for the transcendental possibility of
things--the condition of which is that there be an object corresponding
to the conception, is a trick which can only deceive the inexperienced.*


   [*Footnote: In one word, to none of these conceptions belongs a
corresponding object, and consequently their real possibility cannot
be demonstrated, if we take away sensuous intuition--the only intuition
which we possess--and there then remains nothing but the logical
possibility, that is, the fact that the conception or thought is
possible--which, however, is not the question; what we want to know
being, whether it relates to an object and thus possesses any meaning.]


It follows incontestably, that the pure conceptions of the understanding
are incapable of transcendental, and must always be of empirical use
alone, and that the principles of the pure understanding relate only
to the general conditions of a possible experience, to objects of the
senses, and never to things in general, apart from the mode in which we
intuite them.

Transcendental analytic has accordingly this important result, to wit,
that the understanding is competent' effect nothing a priori, except the
anticipation of the form of a possible experience in general, and that,
as that which is not phenomenon cannot be an object of experience, it
can never overstep the limits of sensibility, within which alone
objects are presented to us. Its principles are merely principles of
the exposition of phenomena, and the proud name of an ontology, which
professes to present synthetical cognitions a priori of things in
general in a systematic doctrine, must give place to the modest title of
analytic of the pure understanding.

Thought is the act of referring a given intuition to an object. If
the mode of this intuition is unknown to us, the object is merely
transcendental, and the conception of the understanding is employed only
transcendentally, that is, to produce unity in the thought of a manifold
in general. Now a pure category, in which all conditions of sensuous
intuition--as the only intuition we possess--are abstracted, does not
determine an object, but merely expresses the thought of an object in
general, according to different modes. Now, to employ a conception, the
function of judgement is required, by which an object is subsumed under
the conception, consequently the at least formal condition, under which
something can be given in intuition. Failing this condition of judgement
(schema), subsumption is impossible; for there is in such a case
nothing given, which may be subsumed under the conception. The merely
transcendental use of the categories is therefore, in fact, no use at
all and has no determined, or even, as regards its form, determinable
object. Hence it follows that the pure category is incompetent to
establish a synthetical a priori principle, and that the principles of
the pure understanding are only of empirical and never of transcendental
use, and that beyond the sphere of possible experience no synthetical a
priori principles are possible.

It may be advisable, therefore, to express ourselves thus. The pure
categories, apart from the formal conditions of sensibility, have
a merely transcendental meaning, but are nevertheless not of
transcendental use, because this is in itself impossible, inasmuch as
all the conditions of any employment or use of them (in judgements) are
absent, to wit, the formal conditions of the subsumption of an object
under these conceptions. As, therefore, in the character of pure
categories, they must be employed empirically, and cannot be employed
transcendentally, they are of no use at all, when separated from
sensibility, that is, they cannot be applied to an object. They are
merely the pure form of the employment of the understanding in respect
of objects in general and of thought, without its being at the same time
possible to think or to determine any object by their means. But there
lurks at the foundation of this subject an illusion which it is very
difficult to avoid. The categories are not based, as regards their
origin, upon sensibility, like the forms of intuition, space, and time;
they seem, therefore, to be capable of an application beyond the sphere
of sensuous objects. But this is not the case. They are nothing but mere
forms of thought, which contain only the logical faculty of uniting a
priori in consciousness the manifold given in intuition. Apart, then,
from the only intuition possible for us, they have still less meaning
than the pure sensuous forms, space and time, for through them an object
is at least given, while a mode of connection of the manifold, when the
intuition which alone gives the manifold is wanting, has no meaning at
all. At the same time, when we designate certain objects as phenomena or
sensuous existences, thus distinguishing our mode of intuiting them from
their own nature as things in themselves, it is evident that by this
very distinction we as it were place the latter, considered in this
their own nature, although we do not so intuite them, in opposition to
the former, or, on the other hand, we do so place other possible
things, which are not objects of our senses, but are cogitated by the
understanding alone, and call them intelligible existences (noumena).
Now the question arises whether the pure conceptions of our
understanding do possess significance in respect of these latter, and
may possibly be a mode of cognizing them.

But we are met at the very commencement with an ambiguity, which may
easily occasion great misapprehension. The understanding, when it terms
an object in a certain relation phenomenon, at the same time forms out
of this relation a representation or notion of an object in itself, and
hence believes that it can form also conceptions of such objects. Now as
the understanding possesses no other fundamental conceptions besides the
categories, it takes for granted that an object considered as a thing
in itself must be capable of being thought by means of these pure
conceptions, and is thereby led to hold the perfectly undetermined
conception of an intelligible existence, a something out of the sphere
of our sensibility, for a determinate conception of an existence which
we can cognize in some way or other by means of the understanding.

If, by the term noumenon, we understand a thing so far as it is not an
object of our sensuous intuition, thus making abstraction of our mode of
intuiting it, this is a noumenon in the negative sense of the word. But
if we understand by it an object of a non-sensuous intuition, we in this
case assume a peculiar mode of intuition, an intellectual intuition, to
wit, which does not, however, belong to us, of the very possibility of
which we have no notion--and this is a noumenon in the positive sense.

The doctrine of sensibility is also the doctrine of noumena in the
negative sense, that is, of things which the understanding is obliged to
cogitate apart from any relation to our mode of intuition, consequently
not as mere phenomena, but as things in themselves. But the
understanding at the same time comprehends that it cannot employ its
categories for the consideration of things in themselves, because these
possess significance only in relation to the unity of intuitions in
space and time, and that they are competent to determine this unity by
means of general a priori connecting conceptions only on account of the
pure ideality of space and time. Where this unity of time is not to be
met with, as is the case with noumena, the whole use, indeed the whole
meaning of the categories is entirely lost, for even the possibility of
things to correspond to the categories is in this case incomprehensible.
On this point, I need only refer the reader to what I have said at the
commencement of the General Remark appended to the foregoing chapter.
Now, the possibility of a thing can never be proved from the fact that
the conception of it is not self-contradictory, but only by means of
an intuition corresponding to the conception. If, therefore, we wish to
apply the categories to objects which cannot be regarded as phenomena,
we must have an intuition different from the sensuous, and in this case
the objects would be a noumena in the positive sense of the word. Now,
as such an intuition, that is, an intellectual intuition, is no part of
our faculty of cognition, it is absolutely impossible for the categories
to possess any application beyond the limits of experience. It may be
true that there are intelligible existences to which our faculty of
sensuous intuition has no relation, and cannot be applied, but our
conceptions of the understanding, as mere forms of thought for our
sensuous intuition, do not extend to these. What, therefore, we call
noumenon must be understood by us as such in a negative sense.

If I take away from an empirical intuition all thought (by means of the
categories), there remains no cognition of any object; for by means of
mere intuition nothing is cogitated, and, from the existence of such
or such an affection of sensibility in me, it does not follow that this
affection or representation has any relation to an object without
me. But if I take away all intuition, there still remains the form of
thought, that is, the mode of determining an object for the manifold
of a possible intuition. Thus the categories do in some measure really
extend further than sensuous intuition, inasmuch as they think objects
in general, without regard to the mode (of sensibility) in which
these objects are given. But they do not for this reason apply to and
determine a wider sphere of objects, because we cannot assume that such
can be given, without presupposing the possibility of another than
the sensuous mode of intuition, a supposition we are not justified in
making.

I call a conception problematical which contains in itself no
contradiction, and which is connected with other cognitions as a
limitation of given conceptions, but whose objective reality cannot
be cognized in any manner. The conception of a noumenon, that is, of a
thing which must be cogitated not as an object of sense, but as a
thing in itself (solely through the pure understanding), is not
self-contradictory, for we are not entitled to maintain that sensibility
is the only possible mode of intuition. Nay, further, this conception is
necessary to restrain sensuous intuition within the bounds of phenomena,
and thus to limit the objective validity of sensuous cognition; for
things in themselves, which lie beyond its province, are called noumena
for the very purpose of indicating that this cognition does not extend
its application to all that the understanding thinks. But, after all,
the possibility of such noumena is quite incomprehensible, and beyond
the sphere of phenomena, all is for us a mere void; that is to say,
we possess an understanding whose province does problematically extend
beyond this sphere, but we do not possess an intuition, indeed, not even
the conception of a possible intuition, by means of which objects beyond
the region of sensibility could be given us, and in reference to which
the understanding might be employed assertorically. The conception of a
noumenon is therefore merely a limitative conception and therefore only
of negative use. But it is not an arbitrary or fictitious notion, but
is connected with the limitation of sensibility, without, however, being
capable of presenting us with any positive datum beyond this sphere.

The division of objects into phenomena and noumena, and of the
world into a mundus sensibilis and intelligibilis is therefore quite
inadmissible in a positive sense, although conceptions do certainly
admit of such a division; for the class of noumena have no determinate
object corresponding to them, and cannot therefore possess objective
validity. If we abandon the senses, how can it be made conceivable
that the categories (which are the only conceptions that could serve as
conceptions for noumena) have any sense or meaning at all, inasmuch
as something more than the mere unity of thought, namely, a possible
intuition, is requisite for their application to an object? The
conception of a noumenon, considered as merely problematical, is,
however, not only admissible, but, as a limitative conception of
sensibility, absolutely necessary. But, in this case, a noumenon is not
a particular intelligible object for our understanding; on the contrary,
the kind of understanding to which it could belong is itself a problem,
for we cannot form the most distant conception of the possibility of an
understanding which should cognize an object, not discursively by
means of categories, but intuitively in a non-sensuous intuition. Our
understanding attains in this way a sort of negative extension. That is
to say, it is not limited by, but rather limits, sensibility, by giving
the name of noumena to things, not considered as phenomena, but as
things in themselves. But it at the same time prescribes limits to
itself, for it confesses itself unable to cognize these by means of the
categories, and hence is compelled to cogitate them merely as an unknown
something.

I find, however, in the writings of modern authors, an entirely
different use of the expressions, mundus sensibilis and intelligibilis,
which quite departs from the meaning of the ancients--an acceptation in
which, indeed, there is to be found no difficulty, but which at the same
time depends on mere verbal quibbling. According to this meaning,
some have chosen to call the complex of phenomena, in so far as it is
intuited, mundus sensibilis, but in so far as the connection thereof is
cogitated according to general laws of thought, mundus intelligibilis.
Astronomy, in so far as we mean by the word the mere observation of the
starry heaven, may represent the former; a system of astronomy, such as
the Copernican or Newtonian, the latter. But such twisting of words is a
mere sophistical subterfuge, to avoid a difficult question, by modifying
its meaning to suit our own convenience. To be sure, understanding and
reason are employed in the cognition of phenomena; but the question is,
whether these can be applied when the object is not a phenomenon and in
this sense we regard it if it is cogitated as given to the understanding
alone, and not to the senses. The question therefore is whether, over
and above the empirical use of the understanding, a transcendental use
is possible, which applies to the noumenon as an object. This question
we have answered in the negative.

When therefore we say, the senses represent objects as they appear, the
understanding as they are, the latter statement must not be understood
in a transcendental, but only in an empirical signification, that is,
as they must be represented in the complete connection of phenomena, and
not according to what they may be, apart from their relation to possible
experience, consequently not as objects of the pure understanding. For
this must ever remain unknown to us. Nay, it is also quite unknown to us
whether any such transcendental or extraordinary cognition is possible
under any circumstances, at least, whether it is possible by means of
our categories. Understanding and sensibility, with us, can determine
objects only in conjunction. If we separate them, we have intuitions
without conceptions, or conceptions without intuitions; in both cases,
representations, which we cannot apply to any determinate object.

If, after all our inquiries and explanations, any one still hesitates to
abandon the mere transcendental use of the categories, let him attempt
to construct with them a synthetical proposition. It would, of course,
be unnecessary for this purpose to construct an analytical proposition,
for that does not extend the sphere of the understanding, but, being
concerned only about what is cogitated in the conception itself, it
leaves it quite undecided whether the conception has any relation to
objects, or merely indicates the unity of thought--complete abstraction
being made of the modi in which an object may be given: in such a
proposition, it is sufficient for the understanding to know what lies
in the conception--to what it applies is to it indifferent. The attempt
must therefore be made with a synthetical and so-called transcendental
principle, for example: "Everything that exists, exists as substance,"
or, "Everything that is contingent exists as an effect of some other
thing, viz., of its cause." Now I ask, whence can the understanding draw
these synthetical propositions, when the conceptions contained therein
do not relate to possible experience but to things in themselves
(noumena)? Where is to be found the third term, which is always
requisite PURE site in a synthetical proposition, which may connect
in the same proposition conceptions which have no logical (analytical)
connection with each other? The proposition never will be demonstrated,
nay, more, the possibility of any such pure assertion never can
be shown, without making reference to the empirical use of the
understanding, and thus, ipso facto, completely renouncing pure
and non-sensuous judgement. Thus the conception of pure and merely
intelligible objects is completely void of all principles of its
application, because we cannot imagine any mode in which they might be
given, and the problematical thought which leaves a place open for
them serves only, like a void space, to limit the use of empirical
principles, without containing at the same time any other object of
cognition beyond their sphere.



APPENDIX.

Of the Equivocal Nature or Amphiboly of the Conceptions of Reflection
from the Confusion of the Transcendental with the Empirical use of the
Understanding.

Reflection (reflexio) is not occupied about objects themselves, for the
purpose of directly obtaining conceptions of them, but is that state of
the mind in which we set ourselves to discover the subjective conditions
under which we obtain conceptions. It is the consciousness of the
relation of given representations to the different sources or faculties
of cognition, by which alone their relation to each other can be
rightly determined. The first question which occurs in considering our
representations is to what faculty of cognition do they belong? To the
understanding or to the senses? Many judgements are admitted to be true
from mere habit or inclination; but, because reflection neither precedes
nor follows, it is held to be a judgement that has its origin in the
understanding. All judgements do not require examination, that is,
investigation into the grounds of their truth. For, when they are
immediately certain (for example: "Between two points there can be only
one straight line"), no better or less mediate test of their truth can
be found than that which they themselves contain and express. But
all judgement, nay, all comparisons require reflection, that is, a
distinction of the faculty of cognition to which the given conceptions
belong. The act whereby I compare my representations with the faculty of
cognition which originates them, and whereby I distinguish whether they
are compared with each other as belonging to the pure understanding
or to sensuous intuition, I term transcendental reflection. Now, the
relations in which conceptions can stand to each other are those of
identity and difference, agreement and opposition, of the internal and
external, finally, of the determinable and the determining (matter
and form). The proper determination of these relations rests on the
question, to what faculty of cognition they subjectively belong, whether
to sensibility or understanding? For, on the manner in which we solve
this question depends the manner in which we must cogitate these
relations.

Before constructing any objective judgement, we compare the conceptions
that are to be placed in the judgement, and observe whether there exists
identity (of many representations in one conception), if a general
judgement is to be constructed, or difference, if a particular; whether
there is agreement when affirmative; and opposition when negative
judgements are to be constructed, and so on. For this reason we ought
to call these conceptions, conceptions of comparison (conceptus
comparationis). But as, when the question is not as to the logical form,
but as to the content of conceptions, that is to say, whether the things
themselves are identical or different, in agreement or opposition,
and so on, the things can have a twofold relation to our faculty
of cognition, to wit, a relation either to sensibility or to the
understanding, and as on this relation depends their relation to
each other, transcendental reflection, that is, the relation of given
representations to one or the other faculty of cognition, can alone
determine this latter relation. Thus we shall not be able to discover
whether the things are identical or different, in agreement or
opposition, etc., from the mere conception of the things by means
of comparison (comparatio), but only by distinguishing the mode
of cognition to which they belong, in other words, by means of
transcendental reflection. We may, therefore, with justice say, that
logical reflection is mere comparison, for in it no account is taken of
the faculty of cognition to which the given conceptions belong, and
they are consequently, as far as regards their origin, to be treated
as homogeneous; while transcendental reflection (which applies to the
objects themselves) contains the ground of the possibility of objective
comparison of representations with each other, and is therefore very
different from the former, because the faculties of cognition to which
they belong are not even the same. Transcendental reflection is a duty
which no one can neglect who wishes to establish an a priori judgement
upon things. We shall now proceed to fulfil this duty, and thereby throw
not a little light on the question as to the determination of the proper
business of the understanding.

1. Identity and Difference. When an object is presented to us several
times, but always with the same internal determinations (qualitas et
quantitas), it, if an object of pure understanding, is always the same,
not several things, but only one thing (numerica identitas); but if a
phenomenon, we do not concern ourselves with comparing the conception of
the thing with the conception of some other, but, although they may be
in this respect perfectly the same, the difference of place at the same
time is a sufficient ground for asserting the numerical difference of
these objects (of sense). Thus, in the case of two drops of water, we
may make complete abstraction of all internal difference (quality and
quantity), and, the fact that they are intuited at the same time in
different places, is sufficient to justify us in holding them to
be numerically different. Leibnitz regarded phenomena as things in
themselves, consequently as intelligibilia, that is, objects of pure
understanding (although, on account of the confused nature of their
representations, he gave them the name of phenomena), and in this
case his principle of the indiscernible (principium identatis
indiscernibilium) is not to be impugned. But, as phenomena are objects
of sensibility, and, as the understanding, in respect of them, must be
employed empirically and not purely or transcendentally, plurality
and numerical difference are given by space itself as the condition of
external phenomena. For one part of space, although it may be perfectly
similar and equal to another part, is still without it, and for this
reason alone is different from the latter, which is added to it in order
to make up a greater space. It follows that this must hold good of
all things that are in the different parts of space at the same time,
however similar and equal one may be to another.

2. Agreement and Opposition. When reality is represented by the pure
understanding (realitas noumenon), opposition between realities is
incogitable--such a relation, that is, that when these realities are
connected in one subject, they annihilate the effects of each other and
may be represented in the formula 3 -3 = 0. On the other hand, the
real in a phenomenon (realitas phaenomenon) may very well be in mutual
opposition, and, when united in the same subject, the one may completely
or in part annihilate the effect or consequence of the other; as in the
case of two moving forces in the same straight line drawing or
impelling a point in opposite directions, or in the case of a pleasure
counterbalancing a certain amount of pain.

3. The Internal and External. In an object of the pure understanding,
only that is internal which has no relation (as regards its existence)
to anything different from itself. On the other hand, the internal
determinations of a substantia phaenomenon in space are nothing
but relations, and it is itself nothing more than a complex of mere
relations. Substance in space we are cognizant of only through forces
operative in it, either drawing others towards itself (attraction),
or preventing others from forcing into itself (repulsion and
impenetrability). We know no other properties that make up the
conception of substance phenomenal in space, and which we term matter.
On the other hand, as an object of the pure understanding, every
substance must have internal determination and forces. But what other
internal attributes of such an object can I think than those which my
internal sense presents to me? That, to wit, which in either itself
thought, or something analogous to it. Hence Leibnitz, who looked upon
things as noumena, after denying them everything like external relation,
and therefore also composition or combination, declared that all
substances, even the component parts of matter, were simple substances
with powers of representation, in one word, monads.

4. Matter and Form. These two conceptions lie at the foundation of all
other reflection, so inseparably are they connected with every mode of
exercising the understanding. The former denotes the determinable in
general, the second its determination, both in a transcendental sense,
abstraction being made of every difference in that which is given, and
of the mode in which it is determined. Logicians formerly termed the
universal, matter, the specific difference of this or that part of
the universal, form. In a judgement one may call the given conceptions
logical matter (for the judgement), the relation of these to each other
(by means of the copula), the form of the judgement. In an object, the
composite parts thereof (essentialia) are the matter; the mode in which
they are connected in the object, the form. In respect to things
in general, unlimited reality was regarded as the matter of all
possibility, the limitation thereof (negation) as the form, by which
one thing is distinguished from another according to transcendental
conceptions. The understanding demands that something be given (at least
in the conception), in order to be able to determine it in a certain
manner. Hence, in a conception of the pure understanding, the matter
precedes the form, and for this reason Leibnitz first assumed the
existence of things (monads) and of an internal power of representation
in them, in order to found upon this their external relation and the
community their state (that is, of their representations). Hence, with
him, space and time were possible--the former through the relation of
substances, the latter through the connection of their determinations
with each other, as causes and effects. And so would it really be,
if the pure understanding were capable of an immediate application
to objects, and if space and time were determinations of things in
themselves. But being merely sensuous intuitions, in which we determine
all objects solely as phenomena, the form of intuition (as a subjective
property of sensibility) must antecede all matter (sensations),
consequently space and time must antecede all phenomena and all data
of experience, and rather make experience itself possible. But the
intellectual philosopher could not endure that the form should precede
the things themselves and determine their possibility; an objection
perfectly correct, if we assume that we intuite things as they are,
although with confused representation. But as sensuous intuition is a
peculiar subjective condition, which is a priori at the foundation of
all perception, and the form of which is primitive, the form must be
given per se, and so far from matter (or the things themselves which
appear) lying at the foundation of experience (as we must conclude,
if we judge by mere conceptions), the very possibility of itself
presupposes, on the contrary, a given formal intuition (space and time).



REMARK ON THE AMPHIBOLY OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF REFLECTION.

Let me be allowed to term the position which we assign to a
conception either in the sensibility or in the pure understanding, the
transcendental place. In this manner, the appointment of the position
which must be taken by each conception according to the difference
in its use, and the directions for determining this place to all
conceptions according to rules, would be a transcendental topic, a
doctrine which would thoroughly shield us from the surreptitious devices
of the pure understanding and the delusions which thence arise, as it
would always distinguish to what faculty of cognition each conception
properly belonged. Every conception, every title, under which many
cognitions rank together, may be called a logical place. Upon this is
based the logical topic of Aristotle, of which teachers and rhetoricians
could avail themselves, in order, under certain titles of thought, to
observe what would best suit the matter they had to treat, and thus
enable themselves to quibble and talk with fluency and an appearance of
profundity.

Transcendental topic, on the contrary, contains nothing more than the
above-mentioned four titles of all comparison and distinction, which
differ from categories in this respect, that they do not represent the
object according to that which constitutes its conception (quantity,
reality), but set forth merely the comparison of representations, which
precedes our conceptions of things. But this comparison requires a
previous reflection, that is, a determination of the place to which the
representations of the things which are compared belong, whether,
to wit, they are cogitated by the pure understanding, or given by
sensibility.

Conceptions may be logically compared without the trouble of inquiring
to what faculty their objects belong, whether as noumena, to the
understanding, or as phenomena, to sensibility. If, however, we wish to
employ these conceptions in respect of objects, previous transcendental
reflection is necessary. Without this reflection I should make a very
unsafe use of these conceptions, and construct pretended synthetical
propositions which critical reason cannot acknowledge and which
are based solely upon a transcendental amphiboly, that is, upon a
substitution of an object of pure understanding for a phenomenon.

For want of this doctrine of transcendental topic, and consequently
deceived by the amphiboly of the conceptions of reflection, the
celebrated Leibnitz constructed an intellectual system of the world,
or rather, believed himself competent to cognize the internal nature of
things, by comparing all objects merely with the understanding and the
abstract formal conceptions of thought. Our table of the conceptions of
reflection gives us the unexpected advantage of being able to exhibit
the distinctive peculiarities of his system in all its parts, and at the
same time of exposing the fundamental principle of this peculiar mode of
thought, which rested upon naught but a misconception. He compared all
things with each other merely by means of conceptions, and naturally
found no other differences than those by which the understanding
distinguishes its pure conceptions one from another. The conditions
of sensuous intuition, which contain in themselves their own means of
distinction, he did not look upon as primitive, because sensibility
was to him but a confused mode of representation and not any particular
source of representations. A phenomenon was for him the representation
of the thing in itself, although distinguished from cognition by the
understanding only in respect of the logical form--the former with its
usual want of analysis containing, according to him, a certain mixture
of collateral representations in its conception of a thing, which it is
the duty of the understanding to separate and distinguish. In one word,
Leibnitz intellectualized phenomena, just as Locke, in his system
of noogony (if I may be allowed to make use of such expressions),
sensualized the conceptions of the understanding, that is to say,
declared them to be nothing more than empirical or abstract conceptions
of reflection. Instead of seeking in the understanding and sensibility
two different sources of representations, which, however, can present us
with objective judgements of things only in conjunction, each of
these great men recognized but one of these faculties, which, in their
opinion, applied immediately to things in themselves, the other having
no duty but that of confusing or arranging the representations of the
former.

Accordingly, the objects of sense were compared by Leibnitz as things in
general merely in the understanding.

1st. He compares them in regard to their identity or difference--as
judged by the understanding. As, therefore, he considered merely the
conceptions of objects, and not their position in intuition, in
which alone objects can be given, and left quite out of sight the
transcendental locale of these conceptions--whether, that is, their
object ought to be classed among phenomena, or among things in
themselves, it was to be expected that he should extend the application
of the principle of indiscernibles, which is valid solely of conceptions
of things in general, to objects of sense (mundus phaenomenon), and that
he should believe that he had thereby contributed in no small degree to
extend our knowledge of nature. In truth, if I cognize in all its inner
determinations a drop of water as a thing in itself, I cannot look upon
one drop as different from another, if the conception of the one is
completely identical with that of the other. But if it is a phenomenon
in space, it has a place not merely in the understanding (among
conceptions), but also in sensuous external intuition (in space), and in
this case, the physical locale is a matter of indifference in regard to
the internal determinations of things, and one place, B, may contain
a thing which is perfectly similar and equal to another in a place, A,
just as well as if the two things were in every respect different from
each other. Difference of place without any other conditions, makes the
plurality and distinction of objects as phenomena, not only possible in
itself, but even necessary. Consequently, the above so-called law is not
a law of nature. It is merely an analytical rule for the comparison of
things by means of mere conceptions.

2nd. The principle: "Realities (as simple affirmations) never logically
contradict each other," is a proposition perfectly true respecting the
relation of conceptions, but, whether as regards nature, or things in
themselves (of which we have not the slightest conception), is without
any the least meaning. For real opposition, in which A -B is = 0,
exists everywhere, an opposition, that is, in which one reality united
with another in the same subject annihilates the effects of the other--a
fact which is constantly brought before our eyes by the different
antagonistic actions and operations in nature, which, nevertheless, as
depending on real forces, must be called realitates phaenomena. General
mechanics can even present us with the empirical condition of this
opposition in an a priori rule, as it directs its attention to the
opposition in the direction of forces--a condition of which the
transcendental conception of reality can tell us nothing. Although M.
Leibnitz did not announce this proposition with precisely the pomp of
a new principle, he yet employed it for the establishment of
new propositions, and his followers introduced it into their
Leibnitzio-Wolfian system of philosophy. According to this principle,
for example, all evils are but consequences of the limited nature of
created beings, that is, negations, because these are the only opposite
of reality. (In the mere conception of a thing in general this is really
the case, but not in things as phenomena.) In like manner, the upholders
of this system deem it not only possible, but natural also, to connect
and unite all reality in one being, because they acknowledge no other
sort of opposition than that of contradiction (by which the conception
itself of a thing is annihilated), and find themselves unable to
conceive an opposition of reciprocal destruction, so to speak, in which
one real cause destroys the effect of another, and the conditions of
whose representation we meet with only in sensibility.

3rd. The Leibnitzian monadology has really no better foundation than on
this philosopher's mode of falsely representing the difference of
the internal and external solely in relation to the understanding.
Substances, in general, must have something inward, which is therefore
free from external relations, consequently from that of composition
also. The simple--that which can be represented by a unit--is therefore
the foundation of that which is internal in things in themselves. The
internal state of substances cannot therefore consist in place, shape,
contact, or motion, determinations which are all external relations,
and we can ascribe to them no other than that whereby we internally
determine our faculty of sense itself, that is to say, the state of
representation. Thus, then, were constructed the monads, which were to
form the elements of the universe, the active force of which consists in
representation, the effects of this force being thus entirely confined
to themselves.

For the same reason, his view of the possible community of substances
could not represent it but as a predetermined harmony, and by no means
as a physical influence. For inasmuch as everything is occupied only
internally, that is, with its own representations, the state of the
representations of one substance could not stand in active and living
connection with that of another, but some third cause operating on all
without exception was necessary to make the different states correspond
with one another. And this did not happen by means of assistance applied
in each particular case (systema assistentiae), but through the unity of
the idea of a cause occupied and connected with all substances, in which
they necessarily receive, according to the Leibnitzian school, their
existence and permanence, consequently also reciprocal correspondence,
according to universal laws.

4th. This philosopher's celebrated doctrine of space and time, in which
he intellectualized these forms of sensibility, originated in the same
delusion of transcendental reflection. If I attempt to represent by the
mere understanding, the external relations of things, I can do so only
by employing the conception of their reciprocal action, and if I wish
to connect one state of the same thing with another state, I must avail
myself of the notion of the order of cause and effect. And thus Leibnitz
regarded space as a certain order in the community of substances, and
time as the dynamical sequence of their states. That which space and
time possess proper to themselves and independent of things, he ascribed
to a necessary confusion in our conceptions of them, whereby that which
is a mere form of dynamical relations is held to be a self-existent
intuition, antecedent even to things themselves. Thus space and time
were the intelligible form of the connection of things (substances and
their states) in themselves. But things were intelligible substances
(substantiae noumena). At the same time, he made these conceptions valid
of phenomena, because he did not allow to sensibility a peculiar mode of
intuition, but sought all, even the empirical representation of objects,
in the understanding, and left to sense naught but the despicable task
of confusing and disarranging the representations of the former.

But even if we could frame any synthetical proposition concerning things
in themselves by means of the pure understanding (which is impossible),
it could not apply to phenomena, which do not represent things in
themselves. In such a case I should be obliged in transcendental
reflection to compare my conceptions only under the conditions of
sensibility, and so space and time would not be determinations of things
in themselves, but of phenomena. What things may be in themselves, I
know not and need not know, because a thing is never presented to me
otherwise than as a phenomenon.

I must adopt the same mode of procedure with the other conceptions
of reflection. Matter is substantia phaenomenon. That in it which is
internal I seek to discover in all parts of space which it occupies, and
in all the functions and operations it performs, and which are indeed
never anything but phenomena of the external sense. I cannot therefore
find anything that is absolutely, but only what is comparatively
internal, and which itself consists of external relations. The
absolutely internal in matter, and as it should be according to the pure
understanding, is a mere chimera, for matter is not an object for
the pure understanding. But the transcendental object, which is the
foundation of the phenomenon which we call matter, is a mere nescio
quid, the nature of which we could not understand, even though someone
were found able to tell us. For we can understand nothing that does not
bring with it something in intuition corresponding to the expressions
employed. If, by the complaint of being unable to perceive the internal
nature of things, it is meant that we do not comprehend by the pure
understanding what the things which appear to us may be in themselves,
it is a silly and unreasonable complaint; for those who talk thus really
desire that we should be able to cognize, consequently to intuite,
things without senses, and therefore wish that we possessed a faculty
of cognition perfectly different from the human faculty, not merely in
degree, but even as regards intuition and the mode thereof, so that thus
we should not be men, but belong to a class of beings, the possibility
of whose existence, much less their nature and constitution, we have
no means of cognizing. By observation and analysis of phenomena we
penetrate into the interior of nature, and no one can say what progress
this knowledge may make in time. But those transcendental questions
which pass beyond the limits of nature, we could never answer, even
although all nature were laid open to us, because we have not the power
of observing our own mind with any other intuition than that of our
internal sense. For herein lies the mystery of the origin and source
of our faculty of sensibility. Its application to an object, and the
transcendental ground of this unity of subjective and objective, lie too
deeply concealed for us, who cognize ourselves only through the
internal sense, consequently as phenomena, to be able to discover in our
existence anything but phenomena, the non-sensuous cause of which we at
the same time earnestly desire to penetrate to.

The great utility of this critique of conclusions arrived at by the
processes of mere reflection consists in its clear demonstration of the
nullity of all conclusions respecting objects which are compared
with each other in the understanding alone, while it at the same time
confirms what we particularly insisted on, namely, that, although
phenomena are not included as things in themselves among the objects of
the pure understanding, they are nevertheless the only things by which
our cognition can possess objective reality, that is to say, which give
us intuitions to correspond with our conceptions.

When we reflect in a purely logical manner, we do nothing more than
compare conceptions in our understanding, to discover whether both have
the same content, whether they are self-contradictory or not, whether
anything is contained in either conception, which of the two is given,
and which is merely a mode of thinking that given. But if I apply these
conceptions to an object in general (in the transcendental sense),
without first determining whether it is an object of sensuous or
intellectual intuition, certain limitations present themselves, which
forbid us to pass beyond the conceptions and render all empirical use
of them impossible. And thus these limitations prove that the
representation of an object as a thing in general is not only
insufficient, but, without sensuous determination and independently of
empirical conditions, self-contradictory; that we must therefore make
abstraction of all objects, as in logic, or, admitting them, must think
them under conditions of sensuous intuition; that, consequently, the
intelligible requires an altogether peculiar intuition, which we do not
possess, and in the absence of which it is for us nothing; while, on the
other hand phenomena cannot be objects in themselves. For, when I merely
think things in general, the difference in their external relations
cannot constitute a difference in the things themselves; on the
contrary, the former presupposes the latter, and if the conception of
one of two things is not internally different from that of the other,
I am merely thinking the same thing in different relations. Further,
by the addition of one affirmation (reality) to the other, the positive
therein is really augmented, and nothing is abstracted or withdrawn
from it; hence the real in things cannot be in contradiction with or
opposition to itself--and so on.

The true use of the conceptions of reflection in the employment of the
understanding has, as we have shown, been so misconceived by Leibnitz,
one of the most acute philosophers of either ancient or modern times,
that he has been misled into the construction of a baseless system of
intellectual cognition, which professes to determine its objects without
the intervention of the senses. For this reason, the exposition of the
cause of the amphiboly of these conceptions, as the origin of these
false principles, is of great utility in determining with certainty the
proper limits of the understanding.

It is right to say whatever is affirmed or denied of the whole of a
conception can be affirmed or denied of any part of it (dictum de omni
et nullo); but it would be absurd so to alter this logical proposition
as to say whatever is not contained in a general conception is likewise
not contained in the particular conceptions which rank under it; for
the latter are particular conceptions, for the very reason that
their content is greater than that which is cogitated in the general
conception. And yet the whole intellectual system of Leibnitz is based
upon this false principle, and with it must necessarily fall to the
ground, together with all the ambiguous principles in reference to the
employment of the understanding which have thence originated.

Leibnitz's principle of the identity of indiscernibles or
indistinguishables is really based on the presupposition that, if in the
conception of a thing a certain distinction is not to be found, it is
also not to be met with in things themselves; that, consequently,
all things are completely identical (numero eadem) which are not
distinguishable from each other (as to quality or quantity) in our
conceptions of them. But, as in the mere conception of anything
abstraction has been made of many necessary conditions of intuition,
that of which abstraction has been made is rashly held to be
non-existent, and nothing is attributed to the thing but what is
contained in its conception.

The conception of a cubic foot of space, however I may think it, is
in itself completely identical. But two cubic feet in space are
nevertheless distinct from each other from the sole fact of their being
in different places (they are numero diversa); and these places are
conditions of intuition, wherein the object of this conception is
given, and which do not belong to the conception, but to the faculty of
sensibility. In like manner, there is in the conception of a thing no
contradiction when a negative is not connected with an affirmative;
and merely affirmative conceptions cannot, in conjunction, produce any
negation. But in sensuous intuition, wherein reality (take for example,
motion) is given, we find conditions (opposite directions)--of which
abstraction has been made in the conception of motion in general--which
render possible a contradiction or opposition (not indeed of a logical
kind)--and which from pure positives produce zero = 0. We are therefore
not justified in saying that all reality is in perfect agreement
and harmony, because no contradiction is discoverable among its
conceptions.* According to mere conceptions, that which is internal
is the substratum of all relations or external determinations. When,
therefore, I abstract all conditions of intuition, and confine myself
solely to the conception of a thing in general, I can make abstraction
of all external relations, and there must nevertheless remain a
conception of that which indicates no relation, but merely internal
determinations. Now it seems to follow that in everything (substance)
there is something which is absolutely internal and which antecedes all
external determinations, inasmuch as it renders them possible; and
that therefore this substratum is something which does not contain any
external relations and is consequently simple (for corporeal things are
never anything but relations, at least of their parts external to
each other); and, inasmuch as we know of no other absolutely internal
determinations than those of the internal sense, this substratum is not
only simple, but also, analogously with our internal sense, determined
through representations, that is to say, all things are properly monads,
or simple beings endowed with the power of representation. Now all this
would be perfectly correct, if the conception of a thing were the
only necessary condition of the presentation of objects of external
intuition. It is, on the contrary, manifest that a permanent phenomenon
in space (impenetrable extension) can contain mere relations, and
nothing that is absolutely internal, and yet be the primary substratum
of all external perception. By mere conceptions I cannot think anything
external, without, at the same time, thinking something internal, for
the reason that conceptions of relations presuppose given things, and
without these are impossible. But, as an intuition there is something
(that is, space, which, with all it contains, consists of purely formal,
or, indeed, real relations) which is not found in the mere conception of
a thing in general, and this presents to us the substratum which could
not be cognized through conceptions alone, I cannot say: because a thing
cannot be represented by mere conceptions without something absolutely
internal, there is also, in the things themselves which are contained
under these conceptions, and in their intuition nothing external to
which something absolutely internal does not serve as the foundation.
For, when we have made abstraction of all the conditions of intuition,
there certainly remains in the mere conception nothing but the internal
in general, through which alone the external is possible. But this
necessity, which is grounded upon abstraction alone, does not obtain in
the case of things themselves, in so far as they are given in intuition
with such determinations as express mere relations, without having
anything internal as their foundation; for they are not things of a
thing of which we can neither for they are not things in themselves, but
only phenomena. What we cognize in matter is nothing but relations (what
we call its internal determinations are but comparatively internal). But
there are some self-subsistent and permanent, through which a determined
object is given. That I, when abstraction is made of these relations,
have nothing more to think, does not destroy the conception of a thing
as phenomenon, nor the conception of an object in abstracto, but it does
away with the possibility of an object that is determinable according to
mere conceptions, that is, of a noumenon. It is certainly startling to
hear that a thing consists solely of relations; but this thing is simply
a phenomenon, and cannot be cogitated by means of the mere categories:
it does itself consist in the mere relation of something in general to
the senses. In the same way, we cannot cogitate relations of things in
abstracto, if we commence with conceptions alone, in any other manner
than that one is the cause of determinations in the other; for that is
itself the conception of the understanding or category of relation. But,
as in this case we make abstraction of all intuition, we lose altogether
the mode in which the manifold determines to each of its parts its
place, that is, the form of sensibility (space); and yet this mode
antecedes all empirical causality.



   [*Footnote: If any one wishes here to have recourse to the usual
subterfuge, and to say, that at least realitates noumena cannot be in
opposition to each other, it will be requisite for him to adduce an
example of this pure and non-sensuous reality, that it may be understood
whether the notion represents something or nothing. But an example
cannot be found except in experience, which never presents to us
anything more than phenomena; and thus the proposition means nothing
more than that the conception which contains only affirmatives does not
contain anything negative--a proposition nobody ever doubted.]



If by intelligible objects we understand things which can be thought
by means of the pure categories, without the need of the schemata of
sensibility, such objects are impossible. For the condition of the
objective use of all our conceptions of understanding is the mode of
our sensuous intuition, whereby objects are given; and, if we make
abstraction of the latter, the former can have no relation to an object.
And even if we should suppose a different kind of intuition from our
own, still our functions of thought would have no use or signification
in respect thereof. But if we understand by the term, objects of a
non-sensuous intuition, in respect of which our categories are not
valid, and of which we can accordingly have no knowledge (neither
intuition nor conception), in this merely negative sense noumena must be
admitted. For this is no more than saying that our mode of intuition is
not applicable to all things, but only to objects of our senses,
that consequently its objective validity is limited, and that room is
therefore left for another kind of intuition, and thus also for things
that may be objects of it. But in this sense the conception of a
noumenon is problematical, that is to say, it is the notion of that it
that it is possible, nor that it is impossible, inasmuch as we do not
know of any mode of intuition besides the sensuous, or of any other sort
of conceptions than the categories--a mode of intuition and a kind of
conception neither of which is applicable to a non-sensuous object. We
are on this account incompetent to extend the sphere of our objects
of thought beyond the conditions of our sensibility, and to assume the
existence of objects of pure thought, that is, of noumena, inasmuch as
these have no true positive signification. For it must be confessed
of the categories that they are not of themselves sufficient for the
cognition of things in themselves and, without the data of sensibility,
are mere subjective forms of the unity of the understanding. Thought is
certainly not a product of the senses, and in so far is not limited by
them, but it does not therefore follow that it may be employed purely
and without the intervention of sensibility, for it would then be
without reference to an object. And we cannot call a noumenon an object
of pure thought; for the representation thereof is but the problematical
conception of an object for a perfectly different intuition and
a perfectly different understanding from ours, both of which are
consequently themselves problematical. The conception of a noumenon is
therefore not the conception of an object, but merely a problematical
conception inseparably connected with the limitation of our sensibility.
That is to say, this conception contains the answer to the question:
"Are there objects quite unconnected with, and independent of, our
intuition?"--a question to which only an indeterminate answer can be
given. That answer is: "Inasmuch as sensuous intuition does not apply
to all things without distinction, there remains room for other and
different objects." The existence of these problematical objects
is therefore not absolutely denied, in the absence of a determinate
conception of them, but, as no category is valid in respect of them,
neither must they be admitted as objects for our understanding.

Understanding accordingly limits sensibility, without at the same time
enlarging its own field. While, moreover, it forbids sensibility to
apply its forms and modes to things in themselves and restricts it
to the sphere of phenomena, it cogitates an object in itself, only,
however, as a transcendental object, which is the cause of a phenomenon
(consequently not itself a phenomenon), and which cannot be thought
either as a quantity or as reality, or as substance (because these
conceptions always require sensuous forms in which to determine an
object)--an object, therefore, of which we are quite unable to say
whether it can be met with in ourselves or out of us, whether it would
be annihilated together with sensibility, or, if this were taken away,
would continue to exist. If we wish to call this object a noumenon,
because the representation of it is non-sensuous, we are at liberty
to do so. But as we can apply to it none of the conceptions of our
understanding, the representation is for us quite void, and is available
only for the indication of the limits of our sensuous intuition, thereby
leaving at the same time an empty space, which we are competent to
fill by the aid neither of possible experience, nor of the pure
understanding.

The critique of the pure understanding, accordingly, does not permit us
to create for ourselves a new field of objects beyond those which are
presented to us as phenomena, and to stray into intelligible worlds;
nay, it does not even allow us to endeavour to form so much as a
conception of them. The specious error which leads to this--and which is
a perfectly excusable one--lies in the fact that the employment of the
understanding, contrary to its proper purpose and destination, is made
transcendental, and objects, that is, possible intuitions, are made to
regulate themselves according to conceptions, instead of the conceptions
arranging themselves according to the intuitions, on which alone their
own objective validity rests. Now the reason of this again is that
apperception, and with it thought, antecedes all possible determinate
arrangement of representations. Accordingly we think something in
general and determine it on the one hand sensuously, but, on the other,
distinguish the general and in abstracto represented object from this
particular mode of intuiting it. In this case there remains a mode of
determining the object by mere thought, which is really but a logical
form without content, which, however, seems to us to be a mode of
the existence of the object in itself (noumenon), without regard to
intuition which is limited to our senses.

Before ending this transcendental analytic, we must make an addition,
which, although in itself of no particular importance, seems to be
necessary to the completeness of the system. The highest conception,
with which a transcendental philosophy commonly begins, is the division
into possible and impossible. But as all division presupposes a divided
conception, a still higher one must exist, and this is the conception of
an object in general--problematically understood and without its being
decided whether it is something or nothing. As the categories are the
only conceptions which apply to objects in general, the distinguishing
of an object, whether it is something or nothing, must proceed according
to the order and direction of the categories.

1. To the categories of quantity, that is, the conceptions of all, many,
and one, the conception which annihilates all, that is, the conception
of none, is opposed. And thus the object of a conception, to which no
intuition can be found to correspond, is = nothing. That is, it is a
conception without an object (ens rationis), like noumena, which cannot
be considered possible in the sphere of reality, though they must not
therefore be held to be impossible--or like certain new fundamental
forces in matter, the existence of which is cogitable without
contradiction, though, as examples from experience are not forthcoming,
they must not be regarded as possible.

2. Reality is something; negation is nothing, that is, a conception of
the absence of an object, as cold, a shadow (nihil privativum).

3. The mere form of intuition, without substance, is in itself no
object, but the merely formal condition of an object (as phenomenon),
as pure space and pure time. These are certainly something, as forms
of intuition, but are not themselves objects which are intuited (ens
imaginarium).

4. The object of a conception which is self-contradictory, is nothing,
because the conception is nothing--is impossible, as a figure composed
of two straight lines (nihil negativum).

The table of this division of the conception of nothing (the
corresponding division of the conception of something does not require
special description) must therefore be arranged as follows:


                      NOTHING
                        AS

                        1
                As Empty Conception
                 without object,
                  ens rationis
           2                               3
     Empty object of               Empty intuition
      a conception,                without object,
     nihil privativum              ens imaginarium
                        4
                   Empty object
                 without conception,
                  nihil negativum


We see that the ens rationis is distinguished from the nihil negativum
or pure nothing by the consideration that the former must not be
reckoned among possibilities, because it is a mere fiction--though
not self-contradictory, while the latter is completely opposed to
all possibility, inasmuch as the conception annihilates itself. Both,
however, are empty conceptions. On the other hand, the nihil privativum
and ens imaginarium are empty data for conceptions. If light be not
given to the senses, we cannot represent to ourselves darkness, and if
extended objects are not perceived, we cannot represent space. Neither
the negation, nor the mere form of intuition can, without something
real, be an object.



TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC. SECOND DIVISION.

TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC. INTRODUCTION.