

IV. Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of the
Dependence of Phenomenal Existences.

In the preceding remarks, we considered the changes in the world of
sense as constituting a dynamical series, in which each member is
subordinated to another--as its cause. Our present purpose is to avail
ourselves of this series of states or conditions as a guide to
an existence which may be the highest condition of all changeable
phenomena, that is, to a necessary being. Our endeavour to reach,
not the unconditioned causality, but the unconditioned existence, of
substance. The series before us is therefore a series of conceptions,
and not of intuitions (in which the one intuition is the condition of
the other).

But it is evident that, as all phenomena are subject to change and
conditioned in their existence, the series of dependent existences
cannot embrace an unconditioned member, the existence of which would
be absolutely necessary. It follows that, if phenomena were things
in themselves, and--as an immediate consequence from this
supposition--condition and conditioned belonged to the same series of
phenomena, the existence of a necessary being, as the condition of the
existence of sensuous phenomena, would be perfectly impossible.

An important distinction, however, exists between the dynamical and the
mathematical regress. The latter is engaged solely with the combination
of parts into a whole, or with the division of a whole into its parts;
and therefore are the conditions of its series parts of the series,
and to be consequently regarded as homogeneous, and for this reason, as
consisting, without exception, of phenomena. If the former regress, on
the contrary, the aim of which is not to establish the possibility of
an unconditioned whole consisting of given parts, or of an unconditioned
part of a given whole, but to demonstrate the possibility of the
deduction of a certain state from its cause, or of the contingent
existence of substance from that which exists necessarily, it is not
requisite that the condition should form part of an empirical series
along with the conditioned.

In the case of the apparent antinomy with which we are at present
dealing, there exists a way of escape from the difficulty; for it is
not impossible that both of the contradictory statements may be true
in different relations. All sensuous phenomena may be contingent, and
consequently possess only an empirically conditioned existence, and yet
there may also exist a non-empirical condition of the whole series,
or, in other words, a necessary being. For this necessary being, as an
intelligible condition, would not form a member--not even the highest
member--of the series; the whole world of sense would be left in its
empirically determined existence uninterfered with and uninfluenced.
This would also form a ground of distinction between the modes of
solution employed for the third and fourth antinomies. For, while in the
consideration of freedom in the former antinomy, the thing itself--the
cause (substantia phaenomenon)--was regarded as belonging to the series
of conditions, and only its causality to the intelligible world--we are
obliged in the present case to cogitate this necessary being as purely
intelligible and as existing entirely apart from the world of sense
(as an ens extramundanum); for otherwise it would be subject to the
phenomenal law of contingency and dependence.

In relation to the present problem, therefore, the regulative principle
of reason is that everything in the sensuous world possesses an
empirically conditioned existence--that no property of the sensuous
world possesses unconditioned necessity--that we are bound to expect,
and, so far as is possible, to seek for the empirical condition of every
member in the series of conditions--and that there is no sufficient
reason to justify us in deducing any existence from a condition which
lies out of and beyond the empirical series, or in regarding any
existence as independent and self-subsistent; although this should not
prevent us from recognizing the possibility of the whole series being
based upon a being which is intelligible, and for this reason free from
all empirical conditions.

But it has been far from my intention, in these remarks, to prove the
existence of this unconditioned and necessary being, or even to evidence
the possibility of a purely intelligible condition of the existence or
all sensuous phenomena. As bounds were set to reason, to prevent it from
leaving the guiding thread of empirical conditions and losing itself in
transcendent theories which are incapable of concrete presentation; so
it was my purpose, on the other band, to set bounds to the law of the
purely empirical understanding, and to protest against any attempts
on its part at deciding on the possibility of things, or declaring the
existence of the intelligible to be impossible, merely on the ground
that it is not available for the explanation and exposition of
phenomena. It has been shown, at the same time, that the contingency
of all the phenomena of nature and their empirical conditions is quite
consistent with the arbitrary hypothesis of a necessary, although purely
intelligible condition, that no real contradiction exists between them
and that, consequently, both may be true. The existence of such an
absolutely necessary being may be impossible; but this can never be
demonstrated from the universal contingency and dependence of sensuous
phenomena, nor from the principle which forbids us to discontinue the
series at some member of it, or to seek for its cause in some sphere
of existence beyond the world of nature. Reason goes its way in the
empirical world, and follows, too, its peculiar path in the sphere of
the transcendental.

The sensuous world contains nothing but phenomena, which are mere
representations, and always sensuously conditioned; things in themselves
are not, and cannot be, objects to us. It is not to be wondered at,
therefore, that we are not justified in leaping from some member of
an empirical series beyond the world of sense, as if empirical
representations were things in themselves, existing apart from their
transcendental ground in the human mind, and the cause of whose
existence may be sought out of the empirical series. This would
certainly be the case with contingent things; but it cannot be with mere
representations of things, the contingency of which is itself merely a
phenomenon and can relate to no other regress than that which determines
phenomena, that is, the empirical. But to cogitate an intelligible
ground of phenomena, as free, moreover, from the contingency of the
latter, conflicts neither with the unlimited nature of the empirical
regress, nor with the complete contingency of phenomena. And the
demonstration of this was the only thing necessary for the solution of
this apparent antinomy. For if the condition of every conditioned--as
regards its existence--is sensuous, and for this reason a part of
the same series, it must be itself conditioned, as was shown in the
antithesis of the fourth antinomy. The embarrassments into which a
reason, which postulates the unconditioned, necessarily falls, must,
therefore, continue to exist; or the unconditioned must be placed in the
sphere of the intelligible. In this way, its necessity does not require,
nor does it even permit, the presence of an empirical condition: and it
is, consequently, unconditionally necessary.

The empirical employment of reason is not affected by the assumption
of a purely intelligible being; it continues its operations on the
principle of the contingency of all phenomena, proceeding from empirical
conditions to still higher and higher conditions, themselves empirical.
Just as little does this regulative principle exclude the assumption
of an intelligible cause, when the question regards merely the pure
employment of reason--in relation to ends or aims. For, in this case, an
intelligible cause signifies merely the transcendental and to us unknown
ground of the possibility of sensuous phenomena, and its existence,
necessary and independent of all sensuous conditions, is not
inconsistent with the contingency of phenomena, or with the unlimited
possibility of regress which exists in the series of empirical
conditions.



Concluding Remarks on the Antinomy of Pure Reason.

So long as the object of our rational conceptions is the
totality of conditions in the world of phenomena, and the
satisfaction, from this source, of the requirements of reason,
so long are our ideas transcendental and cosmological.
But when we set the unconditioned--which is the aim of
all our inquiries--in a sphere which lies out of the
world of sense and possible experience, our ideas become transcendent.
They are then not merely serviceable towards the completion of the
exercise of reason (which remains an idea, never executed, but always
to be pursued); they detach themselves completely from experience and
construct for themselves objects, the material of which has not been
presented by experience, and the objective reality of which is not based
upon the completion of the empirical series, but upon pure a priori
conceptions. The intelligible object of these transcendent ideas may
be conceded, as a transcendental object. But we cannot cogitate it as
a thing determinable by certain distinct predicates relating to its
internal nature, for it has no connection with empirical conceptions;
nor are we justified in affirming the existence of any such object.
It is, consequently, a mere product of the mind alone. Of all the
cosmological ideas, however, it is that occasioning the fourth antinomy
which compels us to venture upon this step. For the existence of
phenomena, always conditioned and never self-subsistent, requires us
to look for an object different from phenomena--an intelligible object,
with which all contingency must cease. But, as we have allowed ourselves
to assume the existence of a self-subsistent reality out of the field
of experience, and are therefore obliged to regard phenomena as merely a
contingent mode of representing intelligible objects employed by beings
which are themselves intelligences--no other course remains for us than
to follow analogy and employ the same mode in forming some conception
of intelligible things, of which we have not the least knowledge, which
nature taught us to use in the formation of empirical conceptions.
Experience made us acquainted with the contingent. But we are at present
engaged in the discussion of things which are not objects of experience;
and must, therefore, deduce our knowledge of them from that which is
necessary absolutely and in itself, that is, from pure conceptions.
Hence the first step which we take out of the world of sense obliges
us to begin our system of new cognition with the investigation of
a necessary being, and to deduce from our conceptions of it all our
conceptions of intelligible things. This we propose to attempt in the
following chapter.


