

V. In all Theoretical Sciences of Reason, Synthetical Judgements "a
priori" are contained as Principles.

1. Mathematical judgements are always synthetical. Hitherto this fact,
though incontestably true and very important in its consequences, seems
to have escaped the analysts of the human mind, nay, to be in
complete opposition to all their conjectures. For as it was found that
mathematical conclusions all proceed according to the principle of
contradiction (which the nature of every apodeictic certainty requires),
people became persuaded that the fundamental principles of the science
also were recognized and admitted in the same way. But the notion is
fallacious; for although a synthetical proposition can certainly be
discerned by means of the principle of contradiction, this is possible
only when another synthetical proposition precedes, from which the
latter is deduced, but never of itself.

Before all, be it observed, that proper mathematical propositions are
always judgements a priori, and not empirical, because they carry
along with them the conception of necessity, which cannot be given by
experience. If this be demurred to, it matters not; I will then limit my
assertion to pure mathematics, the very conception of which implies that
it consists of knowledge altogether non-empirical and a priori.

We might, indeed at first suppose that the proposition 7 + 5 = 12 is a
merely analytical proposition, following (according to the principle of
contradiction) from the conception of a sum of seven and five. But if we
regard it more narrowly, we find that our conception of the sum of seven
and five contains nothing more than the uniting of both sums into one,
whereby it cannot at all be cogitated what this single number is which
embraces both. The conception of twelve is by no means obtained by
merely cogitating the union of seven and five; and we may analyse our
conception of such a possible sum as long as we will, still we shall
never discover in it the notion of twelve. We must go beyond these
conceptions, and have recourse to an intuition which corresponds to
one of the two--our five fingers, for example, or like Segner in his
Arithmetic five points, and so by degrees, add the units contained in
the five given in the intuition, to the conception of seven. For I first
take the number 7, and, for the conception of 5 calling in the aid of
the fingers of my hand as objects of intuition, I add the units, which I
before took together to make up the number 5, gradually now by means of
the material image my hand, to the number 7, and by this process, I
at length see the number 12 arise. That 7 should be added to 5, I have
certainly cogitated in my conception of a sum = 7 + 5, but not that
this sum was equal to 12. Arithmetical propositions are therefore always
synthetical, of which we may become more clearly convinced by trying
large numbers. For it will thus become quite evident that, turn and
twist our conceptions as we may, it is impossible, without having
recourse to intuition, to arrive at the sum total or product by means of
the mere analysis of our conceptions. Just as little is any principle
of pure geometry analytical. "A straight line between two points is the
shortest," is a synthetical proposition. For my conception of straight
contains no notion of quantity, but is merely qualitative. The
conception of the shortest is therefore fore wholly an addition, and by
no analysis can it be extracted from our conception of a straight line.
Intuition must therefore here lend its aid, by means of which, and thus
only, our synthesis is possible.

Some few principles preposited by geometricians are, indeed, really
analytical, and depend on the principle of contradiction. They serve,
however, like identical propositions, as links in the chain of method,
not as principles--for example, a = a, the whole is equal to itself,
or (a+b) --> a, the whole is greater than its part. And yet even these
principles themselves, though they derive their validity from pure
conceptions, are only admitted in mathematics because they can be
presented in intuition. What causes us here commonly to believe that
the predicate of such apodeictic judgements is already contained in our
conception, and that the judgement is therefore analytical, is merely
the equivocal nature of the expression. We must join in thought a
certain predicate to a given conception, and this necessity cleaves
already to the conception. But the question is, not what we must join
in thought to the given conception, but what we really think therein,
though only obscurely, and then it becomes manifest that the predicate
pertains to these conceptions, necessarily indeed, yet not as thought
in the conception itself, but by virtue of an intuition, which must be
added to the conception.

2. The science of natural philosophy (physics) contains in itself
synthetical judgements a priori, as principles. I shall adduce two
propositions. For instance, the proposition, "In all changes of the
material world, the quantity of matter remains unchanged"; or, that, "In
all communication of motion, action and reaction must always be equal."
In both of these, not only is the necessity, and therefore their origin
a priori clear, but also that they are synthetical propositions. For in
the conception of matter, I do not cogitate its permanency, but merely
its presence in space, which it fills. I therefore really go out of and
beyond the conception of matter, in order to think on to it something
a priori, which I did not think in it. The proposition is therefore not
analytical, but synthetical, and nevertheless conceived a priori; and so
it is with regard to the other propositions of the pure part of natural
philosophy.

3. As to metaphysics, even if we look upon it merely as an attempted
science, yet, from the nature of human reason, an indispensable one, we
find that it must contain synthetical propositions a priori. It is not
merely the duty of metaphysics to dissect, and thereby analytically to
illustrate the conceptions which we form a priori of things; but we seek
to widen the range of our a priori knowledge. For this purpose, we must
avail ourselves of such principles as add something to the original
conception--something not identical with, nor contained in it, and by
means of synthetical judgements a priori, leave far behind us the limits
of experience; for example, in the proposition, "the world must have a
beginning," and such like. Thus metaphysics, according to the proper aim
of the science, consists merely of synthetical propositions a priori.

