
HOW TO TREAT CROUP

SPASMODIC AND TRUE.

_SPASMODIC CROUP._

[Illustration]

DEFINITION.--A spasmodic closure of the glottis which interferes with
respiration. Comes on suddenly and usually at night, without much warning.
It is a purely nervous disease and may be caused by reflex nervous
irritation from undigested food in the stomach or bowels, irritation of the
gums in dentition, or from brain disorders.

SYMPTOMS.--Child awakens suddenly at night with suspended respiration or
very difficult breathing. After a few respirations it cries out and then
falls asleep quietly, or the attack may last an hour or so, when the face
will become pale, veins in the neck become turgid and feet and hands
contract spasmodically. In mild cases the attacks will only occur once
during the night, but may recur on the following night.

HOME TREATMENT.--During the paroxysm dashing cold water in the face is a
common remedy. To terminate the spasm and prevent its return give
teaspoonful doses of {332} powdered alum. The syrup of squills is an old
and tried remedy; give in 15 to 30 drop doses and repeat every 10 minutes
till vomiting occurs. Seek out the cause if possible and remove it. It
commonly lies in some derangement of the digestive organs.

_TRUE CROUP._

DEFINITION.--This disease consists of an inflammation of the mucous
membrane of the upper air passages, particularly of the larynx with the
formation of a false membrane that obstructs the breathing. The disease is
most common in children between the ages of two and seven years, but it may
occur at any age.

SYMPTOMS.--Usually there are symptoms of a cold for three or four days
previous to the attack. Marked hoarseness is observed in the evening with a
ringing metallic cough and some difficulty in breathing, which increases
and becomes somewhat paroxysmal till the face which was at first flushed
becomes pallid and ashy in hue. The efforts at breathing become very great,
and unless the child gets speedy relief it will die of suffocation.

HOME TREATMENT.--Patient should be kept in a moist warm atmosphere, and
cold water applied to the neck early in the attack. As soon as the
breathing seems difficult give a half to one teaspoonful of powdered alum
in honey to produce vomiting and apply the remedies suggested in the
treatment of diphtheria, as the two diseases are thought by many to be
identical. When the breathing becomes labored and face becomes pallid, the
condition is very serious and a physician should be called without delay.

_SCARLET FEVER._

DEFINITION.--An eruptive contagious disease, brought about by direct
exposure to those having the disease, or by contact with clothing, dishes,
or other articles, used about the sick room.

The clothing may be disinfected by heating to a temperature of 230 deg.
Fahrenheit or by dipping in boiling water before washing. {333}

Dogs and cats will also carry the disease and should be kept from the
house, and particularly from the sick room.

SYMPTOMS.--Chilly sensations or a decided chill, fever, headache, furred
tongue, vomiting, sore throat, rapid pulse, hot dry skin and more or less
stupor. In from 6 to 18 hours a fine red rash appears about the ears, neck
and shoulders, which rapidly spreads to the entire surface of the body.
After a few days, a scurf or branny scales will begin to form on the skin.
These scales are the principal source of contagion.

HOME TREATMENT.

1. Isolate the patient from other members of the family to prevent the
spread of the disease.

2. Keep the patient in bed and give a fluid diet of milk gruel, beef tea,
etc., with plenty of cold water to drink.

3. Control the fever by sponging the body with tepid water, and relieve the
pain in the throat by cold compresses, applied externally.

4. As soon as the skin shows a tendency to become scaly, apply goose grease
or clean lard with a little boracic acid powder dusted in it, or better,
perhaps, carbolized vaseline to relieve the itching and prevent the scales
from being scattered about, and subjecting others to the contagion.

REGULAR TREATMENT.--A few drops of aconite every three hours to regulate
the pulse, and if the skin be pale and circulation feeble, with tardy
eruption, administer one to ten drops of tincture of belladonna, according
to the age of the patient. At the end of third week, if eyes look puffy and
feet swell, there is danger of Acute Bright's disease, and a physician
should be consulted. If the case does not progress well under the home
remedies suggested, a physician should be called at once.

_WHOOPING COUGH._

DEFINITION.--This is a contagious disease which is known by a peculiar
whooping sound in the cough. Considerable mucus is thrown off after each
attack of spasmodic coughing.

SYMPTOMS.--It usually commences with the symptoms of a common cold in the
head, some chilliness, feverishness, {334} restlessness, headache, a
feeling of tightness across the chest, violent paroxysms of coughing,
sometimes almost threatening suffocation, and accompanied with vomiting.

HOME TREATMENT.--Patient should eat plain food and avoid cold drafts and
damp air, but keep in the open air as much as possible. A strong tea made
of the tops of red clover is highly recommended. A strong tea made of
chestnut leaves, sweetened with sugar, is also very good.

  1 teaspoonful of powdered alum.
  1 teaspoonful of syrup.

Mix in a tumbler of water, and give the child one teaspoonful every two or
three hours. A kerosene lamp kept burning in the bed chamber at night is
said to lessen the cough and shorten the course of the disease.

_MUMPS._

DEFINITION.--This is a contagious disease causing the inflammation of the
salivary glands, and is generally a disease of childhood and youth.

SYMPTOMS.--A slight fever, stiffness of the neck and lower jaw, swelling
and soreness of the gland. It usually develops in four or five days and
then begins to disappear.

HOME TREATMENT.--Apply to the swelling a hot poultice of cornmeal and bread
and milk. A hop poultice is also excellent. Take a good dose of physic and
rest carefully. A warm general bath, or mustard foot bath, is very good.
Avoid exposure or cold drafts. If a bad cold is taken, serious results may
follow.

_MEASLES._

DEFINITION.--It is an eruptive, contagious disease, preceded by cough and
other catarrhal symptoms for about four or five days. The eruption comes
rapidly in small red spots, which are slightly raised.

SYMPTOMS.--A feeling of weakness, loss of appetite, some fever, cold in the
head, frequent sneezing, watery eyes, dry cough and a hot skin. The disease
takes effect nine or ten days after exposure. {335}

HOME TREATMENT.--Measles is not a dangerous disease in the child, but in an
adult it is often very serious. In childhood very little medicine is
necessary, but exposure must be carefully avoided, and the patient kept in
bed, in a moderately warm room. The diet should be light and nourishing.
Keep the room dark. If the eruption does not come out promptly, apply hot
baths.

COMMON TREATMENT.--Two teaspoonfuls of spirits of nitre, one teaspoonful
paregoric, one wineglassful of camphor water. Mix thoroughly, and give a
teaspoonful in half a tea-cupful of water every two hours. To relieve the
cough, if troublesome, flax seed tea, or infusion of slippery-elm bark,
with a little lemon juice to render more palatable, will be of benefit.

_CHICKEN POX._

DEFINITION.--This is a contagious, eruptive disease, which resembles to
some extent small-pox. The pointed vesicles or pimples have a depression in
the center in chicken-pox, and in small pox they do not.

SYMPTOMS.--Nine to seventeen days elapse after the exposure, before
symptoms appear. Slight fever, a sense of sickness, the appearance of
scattered pimples, some itching and heat. The pimples rapidly change into
little blisters, filled with a watery fluid. After five or six days they
disappear.

HOME TREATMENT.--Milk diet, and avoid all kinds of meat. Keep the bowels
open, and avoid all exposure to cold. Large vesicles on the face should be
punctured early, and irritation by rubbing should be avoided.

_HOME TREATMENT OF DIPHTHERIA._

DEFINITION.--Acute, specific, constitutional disease, with local
manifestations in the throat, mouth, nose, larynx, windpipe, and glands of
the neck. The disease is infectious, but not very contagious under the
proper precautions. It is a disease of childhood, though adults sometimes
contract it. Many of the best physicians of the day consider true or
membranous croup to be due to this diphtheritic membranous disease thus
located in the larynx or trachea. {336}

SYMPTOMS.--Symptoms vary according to the severity of the attack. Chills,
fever, headache, languor, loss of appetite, stiffness of neck, with
tenderness about the angles of the jaw, soreness of the throat, pain in the
ear, aching of the limbs, loss of strength, coated tongue, swelling of the
neck, and offensive breath; lymphatic glands on side of neck enlarged and
tender. The throat is first to be seen red and swollen, then covered with
grayish white patches, which spread, and a false membrane is found on the
mucous membrane. If the nose is attacked, there will be an offensive
discharge, and the child will breathe through the mouth. If the larynx or
throat are involved, the voice will become hoarse, and a croupy cough, with
difficult breathing, shows that the air passage to the lungs is being
obstructed by the false membrane.

HOME TREATMENT.--Isolate the patient, to prevent the spread of the disease.
Diet should be of the most nutritious character, as milk, eggs, broths, and
oysters. Give at intervals of every two or three hours. If patient refuses
to swallow, from the pain caused by the effort, a nutrition injection must
be resorted to. Inhalations of steam and hot water, and allowing the
patient to suck pellets of ice, will give relief. Sponges dipped in hot
water, and applied to the angles of the jaw, are beneficial. Inhalations of
lime, made by slaking freshly burnt lime in a vessel, and directing the
vapor to the child's mouth, by means of a newspaper, or similar
contrivance. Flour of sulphur, blown into the back of the mouth and throat
by means of a goose quill, has been highly recommended. Frequent gargling
of the throat and mouth, with a solution of lactic acid, strong enough to
taste sour, will help to keep the parts clean, and correct the foul breath.
If there is great prostration, with the nasal passage affected, or
hoarseness and difficult breathing, a physician should be called at once.

       *       *       *       *       *


{337}

DISEASES OF WOMEN.

_DISORDERS OF THE MENSES._

1. SUPPRESSION OF, OR SCANTY MENSES.

[Illustration]

HOME TREATMENT.--Attention to the diet, and exercise in the open air to
promote the general health. Some bitter tonic, taken with fifteen grains of
dialyzed iron, well diluted, after meals, if patient is pale and
debilitated. A hot foot bath is often all that is necessary.

2. PROFUSE MENSTRUATION.

HOME TREATMENT.--Avoid highly seasoned food, and the use of spirituous
liquors; also excessive fatigue, either physical or mental. To check the
flow, patient should be kept quiet, and allowed to sip cinnamon tea during
the period.

3. PAINFUL MENSTRUATION.

HOME TREATMENT.--Often brought on by colds. Treat by warm hip baths, hot
drinks (avoiding spirituous liquors), and heat applied to the back and
extremities. A teaspoonful of the fluid extract of viburnum will sometimes
act like a charm.

_HOW TO CURE SWELLED AND SORE BREASTS._

Take and boil a quantity of chamomile, and apply the hot fomentations. This
dissolves the knot, and reduce the swelling and soreness. {338}

_LEUCORRHEA OR WHITES._

HOME TREATMENT.--This disorder, if not arising from some abnormal condition
of the pelvic organs, can easily be cured by patient taking the proper
amount of exercise and good nutritious food, avoiding tea and coffee. An
injection every evening of one teaspoonful of Pond's Extract in a cup of
hot water, after first cleansing the vagina well with a quart of warm
water, is a simple but effective remedy.

_INFLAMMATION OF THE WOMB._

HOME TREATMENT.--When in the acute form this disease is ushered in by a
chill, followed by fever, and pain in the region of the womb. Patient
should be placed in bed, and a brisk purgative given, hot poultices applied
to the abdomen, and the feet and hands kept warm. If the symptoms do not
subside, a physician should be consulted.

_HYSTERIA._

DEFINITION.--A functional disorder of the nervous system of which it is
impossible to speak definitely; characterized by disturbance of the reason,
will, imagination, and emotions, with sometimes convulsive attacks that
resemble epilepsy.

SYMPTOMS.--Fits of laughter, and tears without apparent cause; emotions
easily excited; mind often melancholy and depressed; tenderness along the
spine; disturbances of digestion, with hysterical convulsions, and other
nervous phenomena.

HOME TREATMENT.--Some healthy and pleasant employment should be urged upon
women afflicted with this disease. Men are also subject to it, though not
so frequently. Avoid excessive fatigue and mental worry; also stimulants
and opiates. Plenty of good food and fresh air will do more good than
drugs.

       *       *       *       *       *


{339}

Falling of the Womb.

CAUSES.--The displacement of the womb usually is the result of too much
childbearing, miscarriages, abortions, or the taking of strong medicines to
bring about menstruation. It may also be the result in getting up too
quickly from the childbed. There are, however, other causes, such as a
general breaking down of the health.

SYMPTOMS.--If the womb has fallen forward it presses against the bladder,
causing the patient to urinate frequently. If the womb has fallen back, it
presses against the rectum, and constipation is the result with often
severe pain at stool. If the womb descends into the vagina there is a
feeling of heaviness. All forms of displacement produce pain in the back,
with an irregular and scanty menstrual flow and a dull and exhausted
feeling.

HOME TREATMENT.--Improve the general health. Take some preparation of
cod-liver oil, hot injections (of a teaspoonful of powdered alum with a
pint of water), a daily sitz-bath, and a regular morning bath three times a
week will be found very beneficial. There, however, can be no remedy unless
the womb is first replaced to the proper position. This must be done by a
competent physician who should frequently be consulted.

[Illustration]

{340}

Menstruation.

1. ITS IMPORTANCE.--Menstruation plays a momentous part in the female
economy; indeed, unless it be in every way properly and duly performed, it
is neither possible that a lady can be well, nor is it at all probable that
she will conceive. The large number of barren, of delicate, and of
hysterical women there are in America arises mainly from menstruation not
being duly and properly performed.

2. THE BOUNDARY-LINE.--Menstruation--"the periods"--the appearance of the
catamenia or the menses--is then one of the most important epochs in a
girl's life. It is the boundary-line, the landmark between childhood and
womanhood; it is the threshold, so to speak, of a woman's life. Her body
now develops and expands, and her mental capacity enlarges and improves.

3. THE COMMENCEMENT OF MENSTRUATION.--A good beginning at this time is
peculiarly necessary, or a girl's health is sure to suffer, and different
organs of the body--her lungs, for instance, may become imperiled. A
healthy continuation, at regular periods, is also much needed, or
conception, when she is married, may not occur. Great attention and
skillful management is required to ward off many formidable diseases, which
at the close of menstruation--at "the change of life"--are more likely than
at any time to be developed. If she marry when very young, marriage weakens
her system, and prevents a full development of her body. Moreover, such an
one is, during the progress of her labor, prone to convulsions--which is a
very serious childbed complication.

4. EARLY MARRIAGES.--Statistics prove that twenty per cent--20 in every
100--of females who marry are under age, and that such early marriages are
often followed by serious, and sometimes even by fatal consequences to
mother, to progeny, or to both. Parents ought, therefore, to persuade their
daughters not to marry until they are of age--twenty-one; they should point
out to them the risk and danger likely to ensue if their advice be not
followed; they should impress upon their minds the old adage:

 "Early wed,
  Early dead."

5. TIME TO MARRY.--Parents who have the real interest and happiness of
their daughters at heart, ought, in consonance with the laws of physiology,
to discountenance marriage before twenty; and the nearer the girls arrive
at {341} the age of twenty-five before the consummation of this important
rite, the greater the probability that, physically and morally, they will
be protected against those risks which precocious marriages bring in their
train.

6. FEEBLE PARENTS.--Feeble parents have generally feeble children; diseased
parents, diseased children; nervous parents, nervous children;--"like
begets like." It is sad to reflect, that the innocent have to suffer, not
only for the guilty, but for the thoughtless and inconsiderate. Disease and
debility are thus propagated from one generation to another and the
American race becomes woefully deteriorated.

7. TIME.--Menstruation in this country usually commences at the ages of
from thirteen to sixteen, sometimes earlier; occasionally as early as
eleven or twelve; at other times later, and not until a girl be seventeen
or eighteen years of age. Menstruation in large towns is supposed to
commence at an earlier period than in the country, and earlier in luxurious
than in simple life.

8. CHARACTER.--The menstrual fluid is not exactly blood, although, both in
appearance and properties, it much resembles it; yet it never in the
healthy state clots as blood does. It is a secretion of the womb, and, when
healthy, ought to be of a bright red color, in appearance very much like
the blood from a recently cut finger. The menstrual fluid ought not, as
before observed, clot. If it does, a lady, during "her periods," suffers
intense pain; moreover, she seldom conceives until the clotting has ceased.

9. MENSTRUATION DURING NURSING.--Some ladies, though comparatively few,
menstruate during nursing; when they do, it may be considered not as the
rule, but as the exception. It is said in such instances, that they are
more likely to conceive; and no doubt they are, as menstruation is an
indication of a proneness to conception. Many persons have an idea that
when a woman, during lactation, menstruates, her milk is both sweeter and
purer. Such is an error. Menstruation during nursing is more likely to
weaken the mother, and consequently to deteriorate her milk, and thus make
it less sweet and less pure.

10. VIOLENT EXERCISE.--During "the monthly periods" violent exercise is
injurious; iced drinks and acid beverages are improper; and bathing in the
sea, and bathing the feet in cold water, and cold baths are dangerous;
indeed, at such times as these, no risks should be run, and no experiments
should, for the moment, be permitted, otherwise serious consequences will,
in all probability, ensue. {342}

11. THE PALE, COLORLESS-COMPLEXIONED.--The pale, colorless-complexioned,
helpless, listless, and almost lifeless young ladies who are so constantly
seen in society, usually owe their miserable state of health to absent, to
deficient, or to profuse menstruation. Their breathing is short--they are
soon "out of breath," if they attempt to take exercise--to walk, for
instance, either up stairs or up a hill, or even for half a mile on level
ground, their breath is nearly exhausted--they pant as though they had been
running quickly. They are ready, after the slightest exertion or fatigue,
and after the least worry or excitement, to feel faint, and sometimes even
to actually swoon away. Now such cases may, if judiciously treated, be
generally soon cured. It therefore behooves mothers to seek medical aid
early for their girls, and that before irreparable mischief has been done
to the constitution.

12. POVERTY OF BLOOD.--In a pale, delicate girl or wife, who is laboring
under what is popularly called poverty of blood, the menstrual fluid is
sometimes very scant, at others very copious, but is, in either case,
usually very pale--almost as colorless as water, the patient being very
nervous and even hysterical. Now, these are signs of great debility; but,
fortunately for such an one, a medical man is, in the majority of cases, in
possession of remedies that will soon make her all right again.

13. NO RIGHT TO MARRY.--A delicate girl has no right until she be made
strong, to marry. If she should marry, she will frequently, when in labor,
not have strength, unless she has help, to bring a child into the world;
which, provided she be healthy and well-formed, ought not to be. How
graphically the Bible tells of delicate women not having strength to bring
children into the world: "For the children are come to the birth, and there
is not strength to bring forth."--2 Kings XIX, 3.

14. TOO SPARING.--Menstruation at another time is too sparing; this is a
frequent cause of sterility. Medical aid, in the majority of cases, will be
able to remedy the defect, and, by doing so, will probably be the means of
bringing the womb into a healthy state, and thus predispose to conception.

[Illustration]

{343}

Celebrated Prescriptions for All Diseases and How to Use Them.

[Illustration]

VINEGAR FOR HIVES.

After trying many remedies in a severe case of hives, Mr. Swain found
vinegar lotion gave instant relief, and subsequent trials in other cases
have been equally successful. One part of water to two parts of vinegar is
the strength most suitable.

THROAT TROUBLE.

A teaspoonful of salt, in a cup of hot water, makes a safe and excellent
gargle in most throat troubles.

FOR SWEATING FEET, WITH BAD ODOR.

Wash the feet in warm water with borax, and if this don't cure, use a
solution of permanganate to destroy the fetor; about five grains to each
ounce of water. {344}

AMENORRHOEA.

The following is recommended as a reliable emmenagogue in many cases of
functional amenorrhoea:

  Bichloride of mercury,
  Arsenite of sodium, aa gr. iij.
  Sulphate of strychnine, gr. iss.
  Carbonate of potassium,
  Sulphate of iron, aa gr. xlv.

Mix and divide into sixty pills. Sig. One pill after each meal.

SICK HEADACHE.

Take a spoonful of finely powdered charcoal in a small glass of warm water
to relieve a sick headache.

It absorbs the gasses produced by the fermentation of undigested food.

AN EXCELLENT EYE WASH.

  Acetate of zinc, 20 grains.
  Acetate of morphia, 5 grains.
  Rose water, 4 ounces.  Mix.

FOR FILMS AND CATARACTS OF THE EYES.

  Blood Root Pulverized, 1 ounce.
  Hog's lard, 3 ounces.

Mix, simmer for 20 minutes, then strain; when cold put a little in the eyes
twice or three times a day.

FOR BURNS AND SORES.

  Pitch Burgundy, 2 pounds.
  Bees' Wax, 1 pound.
  Hog's lard, one pound.

Mix all together and simmer over a slow fire until the whole are well mixed
together; then stir it until cold. Apply on muslin to the parts affected.

FOR CHAPPED HANDS.

  Olive oil, 6 ounces.
  Camphor beat fine, 1/2 ounce.

Mix, dissolve by gentle heat over slow fire and when cold apply to the hand
freely.

INTOXICATION.

A man who is helplessly intoxicated may almost immediately restore the
faculties and powers of locomotion by taking half a teaspoonful of chloride
of ammonium in a goblet of water. A wineglassful of strong vinegar will
have the same effect and is frequently resorted to by drunken soldiers.
{345}

NERVOUS DISABILITY. HEADACHE. NEURALGIA. NERVOUSNESS.

  Fluid extract of scullcap, 1 ounce.
  Fluid extract American valerian, 1 ounce.
  Fluid extract catnip, 1 ounce.

Mix all. Dose, from 15 to 30 drops every two hours, in water; most
valuable.

A valuable tonic in all conditions of debility and want of appetite.

Comp. tincture of cinchona in teaspoonful doses in a little water, half
hour before meals.

ANOTHER EXCELLENT TONIC.

  Tincture of gentian, 1 ounce.
  Tincture of Columba, 1 ounce.
  Tincture of collinsonia, 1 ounce.

Mix all. Dose, one tablespoonful in one tablespoonful of water before
meals.

REMEDY FOR CHAPPED HANDS.

When doing housework, if your hands become chapped or red, mix corn meal
and vinegar into a stiff paste and apply to the hand two or three times a
day, after washing them in hot water, then let dry without wiping, and rub
with glycerine. At night use cold cream, and wear gloves.

BLEEDING.

Very hot water is a prompt checker of bleeding, besides, if it is clean, as
it should be, it aids in sterilizing our wound.

TREATMENT FOR CRAMP.

Wherever friction can be conveniently applied, heat will be generated by
it, and the muscle again reduced to a natural condition; but if the pains
proceed from the contraction of some muscle located internally, burnt
brandy is an excellent remedy.

A severe attack which will not yield to this simple treatment may be
conquered by administering a small dose of laudanum or ether, best given
under medical supervision.

TREATMENT FOR COLIC.

Castor oil, given as soon as the symptoms of colic manifest themselves, has
frequently afforded relief. At any rate, the irritating substances may be
expelled from the alimentary canal before the pains will subside. All local
remedies will be ineffectual, and consequently the purgative should be
given in large doses until a copious vacuation is produced. {346}

[Illustration: THE DOCTOR'S VISIT.]

TREATMENT FOR HEARTBURN.

If soda, taken in small quantities after meals, does not relieve the
distress, one may rest assured that the fluid is an alkali and requires an
acid treatment. Proceed, after eating, to squeeze ten drops of lemon-juice
into a small quantity of water, and swallow it. The habit of daily life
should be made to conform to the laws of health, or local treatment will
prove futile.

BILIOUSNESS.

For biliousness, squeeze the juice of a lime or small lemon into half a
glass of cold water, then stir in a little baking soda and drink while it
foams. This receipt will also relieve sick headache if taken at the
beginning.

TURPENTINE APPLICATIONS.

Mix turpentine and lard in equal parts. Warmed and rubbed on the chest, it
is a safe, reliable and mild counter irritant and revulsent in minor lung
complications. {347}

TREATMENT FOR MUMPS.

It is very important that the face and neck be kept warm. Avoid catching
cold, and regulate the stomach and bowels, because, when aggravated, this
disease is communicated to other glands, and assumes there a serious form.
Rest and quiet, with a good condition of the general health, will throw off
this disease without further inconvenience.

TREATMENT FOR FELON.

All medication, such as poulticing, anointing, and the applications of
lotions, is but useless waste of time. The surgeon's knife should be used
as early as possible, for it will be required sooner or later, and the more
promptly it can be applied, the less danger is there from the disease, and
the more agony is spared to the unfortunate victim.

TREATMENT FOR STABS.

A wound made by thrusting a dagger or other oblong instrument into the
flesh, is best treated, if no artery has been severed, by applying lint
scraped from a linen cloth, which serves as an obstruction, allowing and
assisting coagulation. Meanwhile cold water should be applied to the parts
adjoining the wound.

TREATMENT FOR MASHED NAILS.

If the injured member be plunged into very hot water, the nail will become
pliable and adapt itself to the new condition of things, thus alleviating
agony to some extent. A small hole may be bored on the nail with a pointed
instrument, so adroitly so as not to cause pain, yet so successfully as to
relieve pressure on the sensitive tissues. Free applications of arnica or
iodine will have an excellent effect.

TREATMENT FOR FOREIGN BODY IN THE EYE.

When any foreign body enters the eye, close it instantly, and keep it still
until you have an opportunity to ask the assistance of some one; then have
the upper lid folded over a pencil and the exposed surfaces closely
searched; if the body be invisible, catch the everted lid by the lashes,
and drawing it down over the lower lid, suddenly release it, and it will
resume its natural position. Unsuccessful in this attempt, you may be
pretty well assured that the object has become lodged in the tissues, and
will require the assistance of a skilled operator to remove it.

CUTS.

A drop or two of creosote on a cut will stop its bleeding. {348}

       *       *       *       *       *

TREATMENT FOR POISON OAK--POISON IVY--POISON SUMACH.--Mr. Charles Morris,
of Philadelphia, who has studied the subject closely, uses, as a sovereign
remedy, frequent bathing of the affected parts in water as hot as can be
borne. If used immediately after exposure, it may prevent the eruption
appearing. If later, it allays the itching, and gradually dries up the
swellings, though, they are very stubborn after they have once appeared.
But an application every few hours keeps down the intolerable itching,
which is the most annoying feature of sumach poisoning. In addition to
this, the ordinary astringent ointments are useful, as is also that
sovereign lotion, "lead-water and laudanum." Mr. Morris adds to these a
preventive prescription of "wide-open eyes."

BITES AND STINGS OF INSECTS.--Wash with a solution of ammonia water.

BITES OF MAD DOGS.--Apply caustic potash at once to the wound, and give
enough whiskey to cause sleep.

BURNS.--Make a paste of common baking soda and water, and apply it promptly
to the burn. It will quickly check the pain and inflammation.

COLD ON CHEST.--A flannel rag wrung out in boiling water and sprinkled with
turpentine, laid on the chest, gives the greatest relief.

COUGH.--Boil one ounce of flaxseed in a pint of water, strain, and add a
little honey, one ounce of rock candy, and the juice of three lemons. Mix
and boil well. Drink as hot as possible.

SPRAINED ANKLE OR WRIST.--Wash the ankle very frequently with cold salt and
water, which is far better than warm vinegar or decoction of herbs. Keep
the foot as cool as possible to prevent inflammation, and sit with it
elevated on a high cushion. Live on low diet, and take every morning some
cooling medicine, such as Epsom salts. It cures in a few days.

CHILBLAINS, SPRAINS, ETC.--One raw egg well beaten, half a pint of vinegar,
one ounce spirits of turpentine, a quarter of an ounce of spirits of wine,
a quarter of an ounce of camphor. These ingredients to be beaten together,
then put in a bottle and shaken for ten minutes, after which, to be corked
down tightly to exclude the air. In half an hour it is fit for use. To be
well rubbed in, two, three, or four times a day. For rheumatism in the
head, to be rubbed at the back of the neck and behind the ears. In
chilblains this remedy is to be used before they are broken. {349}

HOW TO REMOVE SUPERFLUOUS HAIR.--Sulphuret of Arsenic, one ounce;
Quicklime, one ounce; Prepared Lard, one ounce; White Wax, one ounce. Melt
the Wax, add the Lard. When nearly cold, stir in the other ingredients.
Apply to the superfluous hair, allowing it to remain on from five to ten
minutes; use a table-knife to shave off the hair; then wash with soap and
warm water.

DYSPEPSIA CURE.--Powdered Rhubarb, two drachms; Bicarbonate of Sodium, six
drachms; Fluid Extract of Gentian, three drachms; Peppermint Water, seven
and a half ounces. Mix them. Dose, a teaspoonful half an hour before meals.

FOR NEURALGIA.--Tincture of Belladonna, one ounce; Tincture of Camphor, one
ounce; Tincture of Arnica, one ounce; Tincture of Opium, one ounce. Mix
them. Apply over the seat of the pain, and give ten to twenty drops in
sweetened water every two hours.

FOR COUGHS, COLDS, ETC.--Syrup of Morphia, three ounces; Syrup of Tar,
three and a half ounces; Chloroform, one troy ounce; Glycerine, one troy
ounce. Mix them. Dose, a teaspoonful three or four times a day.

TO CURE HIVES.--Compound syrup of Squill, U. S., three ounces; Syrup of
Ipecac, U. S., one ounce. Mix them. Dose, a teaspoonful.

TO CURE SICK HEADACHE.--Gather sumach leaves in the summer, and spread them
in the sun a few days to dry. Then powder them fine, and smoke, morning and
evening for two weeks, also whenever there are symptoms of approaching
headache. Use a new clay pipe. If these directions are adhered to, this
medicine will surely effect a permanent cure.

WHOOPING COUGH.--Dissolve a scruple of salt of tartar in a gill of water;
add to it ten grains of cochineal; sweeten it with sugar. Give to an infant
a quarter teaspoonful four times a day; two years old, one-half
teaspoonful; from four years, a tablespoonful. Great care is required in
the administration of medicines to infants. We can assure paternal
inquirers that the foregoing may be depended upon.

CUT OR BRUISE.--Apply the moist surface of the inside coating or skin of
the shell of a raw egg. It will adhere of itself, leave no scar, and heal
without pain.

DISINFECTANT.--Chloride of lime should be scattered at least once a week
under sinks and wherever sewer gas is likely to penetrate.

[Illustration: THE YOUNG DOCTOR.]

{362}

COSTIVENESS.--Common charcoal is highly recommended for costiveness. It may
be taken in tea- or tablespoonful, or even larger doses, according to the
exigencies of the case, mixed with molasses, repeating it as often as
necessary. Bathe the bowels with pepper and vinegar. Or take two ounces of
rhubarb, add one ounce of rust of iron, infuse in one quart of wine. Half a
wineglassful every morning. Or take pulverized blood root, one drachm,
pulverized rhubarb, one drachm, castile soap, two scruples. Mix. and roll
into thirty-two pills. Take one, morning and night. By following these
directions it may perhaps save you from a severe attack of the piles, or
some other kindred disease.

TO CURE DEAFNESS.--Obtain pure pickerel oil, and apply four drops morning
and evening to the ear. Great care should be taken to obtain oil that is
perfectly pure.

DEAFNESS.--Take three drops of sheep's gall, warm, and drop it into the ear
on going to bed. The ear must be syringed with warm soap and water in the
morning. The gall must be applied for three successive nights. It is only
efficacious when the deafness is produced by cold. The most convenient way
of warming the gall is by holding it in a silver spoon over the flame of a
light. The above remedy has been frequently tried with perfect success.

GOUT.--This is Col. Birch's recipe for rheumatic gout or acute rheumatism,
commonly called in England the "Chelsea Pensioner." Half an ounce of nitre
(saltpetre), half an ounce of sulphur, half an ounce of flour of mustard,
half an ounce of Turkey rhubarb, quarter of an ounce of powdered guaicum.
Mix, and take a teaspoonful every other night for three nights, and omit
three nights, in a wine-glassful of cold water which has been previously
well boiled.

RINGWORM.--The head is to be washed twice a day with soft soap and warm
soft water; when dried the places to be rubbed with a piece of linen rag
dipped in ammonia from gas tar; the patient should take a little sulphur
and molasses, or some other genuine aperient, every morning; brushes and
combs should be washed every day, and the ammonia kept tightly corked.

PILES.--Hamamelis, both internally or as an injection in rectum. Bathe the
parts with cold water or with astringent lotions, as alum water, especially
in bleeding piles. Ointment of gallic acid and calomel is of repute. The
best treatment of all is, suppositories of iodoform, ergotine, or tannic
acid, which can be made at any drug store. {363}

CHICKEN POX.--No medicine is usually needed, except a tea made from
pleurisy root, to make the child sweat. Milk diet is the best; avoidance of
animal food; careful attention to the bowels; keep cool and avoid exposure
to cold.

SCARLET FEVER.--Cold water compress on the throat. Fats and oils rubbed on
hands and feet. The temperature of the room should be about 68 degrees
Fahr., and all draughts avoided. Mustard baths for retrocession of the rash
and to bring it out. Diet: ripe fruit, toast, gruel, beef tea and milk.
Stimulants are useful to counteract depression of the vital forces.

FALSE MEASLES OR ROSE RASH.--It requires no treatment except hygienic. Keep
the bowels open. Nourishing diet, and if there is itching, moisten the skin
with five per cent. solution of aconite or solution of starch and water.

BILIOUS ATTACKS.--Drop doses of muriatic acid in a wine glass of water
every four hours, or the following prescription. Bicarbonate of soda, one
drachm; Aromatic spirits of ammonia, two drachms; Peppermint water, four
ounces. Dose: Take a teaspoonful every four hours.

DIARRHOEA.--The following prescription is generally all that will be
necessary: acetate of lead, eight grains; gum arabic, two drachms; acetate
of morphia, one grain; and cinnamon water, eight ounces. Take a teaspoonful
every three hours.

Be careful not to eat too much food. Some consider, the best treatment is
to fast, and it is a good suggestion. Patients should keep quiet and have
the room of a warm and even temperature.

VOMITING.--Ice dissolved in the mouth, often cures vomiting when all
remedies fail. Much depends on the diet of persons liable to such attacks;
this should be easily digestible food, taken often and in small quantities.
Vomiting can often be arrested by applying a mustard paste over the region
of the stomach. It is not necessary to allow it to remain until the parts
are blistered, but it may be removed when the part becomes thoroughly red,
and reapplied if required after the redness has disappeared. One of the
secrets to relieve vomiting is to give the stomach perfect rest, not
allowing the patient even a glass of water, as long as the tendency remains
to throw it up again.

NERVOUS HEADACHE.--Extract hyoscymus five grains, pulverized camphor five
grains. Mix. Make four pills, one to be taken when the pain is most severe
in nervous headache. Or three drops tincture nux vomica in a spoonful of
water, two or three times a day. {364}

BLEEDING FROM THE NOSE,--from whatever cause--may generally be stopped by
putting a plug of lint into the nostril; if this does not do, apply a cold
lotion to the forehead; raise the head and place both arms over the head,
so that it will rest on both hands; dip the lint plug, slightly moistened,
in some powdered gum arabic, and plug the nostrils again; or dip the plug
into equal parts of gum arabic and alum. An easier and simpler method is to
place a piece of writing paper on the gums of the upper jaw, under the
upper lip, and let it remain there for a few minutes.

BOILS.--These should be brought to a head by warm poultices of camomile
flowers, or boiled white lily root, or onion root, by fermentation with hot
water, or by stimulating plasters. When ripe they should be destroyed by a
needle or lancet. But this should not be attempted until they are
thoroughly proved.

BUNIONS may be checked in their early development by binding the joint with
adhesive plaster, and keeping it on as long as any uneasiness is felt. The
bandaging should be perfect, and it might be well to extend it round the
foot. An inflamed bunion should be poulticed, and larger shoes be worn.
Iodine 12 grains, lard or spermaceti ointment half an ounce, makes a
capital ointment for bunions. It should be rubbed on gently twice or three
times a day.

FELONS.--One table-spoonful of red lead, and one table-spoonful of castile
soap, and mix them with as much weak lye as will make it soft enough to
spread like a salve, and apply it on the first appearance of the felon, and
it will cure in ten or twelve days.

CURE FOR WARTS.--The easiest way to get rid of warts, is to pare off the
thickened skin which covers the prominent wart; cut it off by successive
layers and shave it until you come to the surface of the skin, and till you
draw blood in two or three places. Then rub the part thoroughly over with
lunar caustic, and one effective operation of this kind will generally
destroy the wart; if not, you cut off the black spot which has been
occasioned by the caustic, and apply it again; or you may apply acetic
acid, and thus you will get rid of it. Care must be taken in applying these
acids, not to rub them on the skin around the wart.

WENS.--Take the yoke of some eggs, beat up, and add as much fine salt as
will dissolve, and apply a plaster to the wen every ten hours. It cures
without pain or any other inconvenience.

       *       *       *       *       *


{365}
