
OR

The Care of the Person.

       *       *       *       *       *

IMPORTANT RULES.

[Illustration: Widower Jones and Widow Smith.]

1. GOOD APPEARANCE.--The first care of all persons should be for their
personal appearance. Those who are slovenly or careless in their habits are
unfit for refined society, and cannot possibly make a good appearance in
it. A well-bred person will always cultivate habits of the most scrupulous
neatness. A gentleman or lady is always well dressed. The garment may be
plain or of coarse material, or even worn "thin and shiny," but if it is
carefully brushed and neat it can be worn with dignity. {85}

2. PERSONAL CLEANLINESS.--Personal appearance depends greatly on the
careful toilet and scrupulous attention to dress. The first point which
marks the gentleman or lady in appearance is rigid cleanliness. This remark
supplies to the body and everything which covers it. A clean skin--only to
be secured by frequent baths--is indispensable.

3. THE TEETH.--The teeth should receive the utmost attention. Many a young
man has been disgusted with a lady by seeing her unclean and discolored
teeth. It takes but a few moments, and if necessary secure some simple
tooth powder or rub the teeth thoroughly every day with a linen
handkerchief, and it will give the teeth and mouth a beautiful and clean
appearance.

4. THE HAIR AND BEARD.--The hair should be thoroughly brushed and well
kept, and the beard of men properly trimmed. Men should not let their hair
grow long and shaggy.

5. UNDERCLOTHING.--The matter of cleanliness extends to all articles of
clothing, underwear as well as the outer clothing. Cleanliness is a mark of
true utility. The clothes need not necessarily be of a rich and expensive
quality, but they can all be kept clean. Some persons have an odor about
them that is very offensive, simply on account of their underclothing being
worn too long without washing. This odor of course cannot be detected by
the person who wears the soiled garments, but other persons easily detect
it and are offended by it.

6. THE BATH.--No person should think for a moment that they can be popular
in society without regular bathing. A bath should be taken at least once a
week, and if the feet perspire they should be washed several times a week,
as the case may require. It is not unfrequent that young men are seen with
dirty ears and neck. This is unpardonable and boorish, and shows gross
neglect. Occasionally a young lady will be called upon unexpectedly when
her neck and smiling face are not emblems of cleanliness. Every lady owes
it to herself to be fascinating; every gentleman is bound, for his own
sake, to be presentable; but beyond this there is the obligation to
society, to one's friends, and to those with whom we may be brought in
contact.

7. SOILED GARMENTS.--A young man's garments may not be expensive, yet there
is no excuse for wearing a soiled collar and a soiled shirt, or carrying a
soiled handkerchief. No one should appear as though he had slept in a
stable, shaggy hair, soiled clothing or garments indifferently put on and
carelessly buttoned. A young man's vest should always be kept buttoned in
the presence of ladies. {86}

8. THE BREATH.--Care should be taken to remedy an offensive breath without
delay. Nothing renders one so unpleasant to one's acquaintance, or is such
a source of misery to one's self. The evil may be from some derangement of
the stomach or some defective condition of the teeth, or catarrhal
affection of the throat and nose. See remedies in other portions of the
book.

       *       *       *       *       *

A YOUNG MAN'S PERSONAL APPEARANCE.

    Dress changes the manners.--VOLTAIRE.

    Whose garments wither, shall receive faded smiles.--SHERIDAN KNOWLES.

    Men of sense follow fashion so far that they are neither conspicuous
    for their excess nor peculiar by their opposition to it.--ANONYMOUS.

1. A well-dressed man does not require so much an extensive as a varied
wardrobe. He does not need a different suit for every season and every
occasion, but if he is careful to select clothes that are simple and not
striking or conspicuous, he may use the garment over and over again without
their being noticed, provided they are suitable to the season and the
occasion.

2. A clean shirt, collar and cuffs always make a young man look neat and
tidy, even if his clothes are not of the latest pattern and are somewhat
threadbare.

3. Propriety is outraged when a man of sixty dresses like a youth of
sixteen. It is bad manners for a gentleman to use perfumes to a noticeable
extent. Avoid affecting singularity in dress. Expensive clothes are no sign
of a gentleman.

[Illustration: The Dude of the 17th Century.]

4. When dressed for company, strive to appear easy and natural. Nothing is
more distressing to a sensitive person, or more ridiculous to one gifted
with refinement, than to see a lady laboring under the consciousness of a
fine gown; or a gentleman who is stiff, awkward and ungainly in a brand-new
coat.

5. Avoid what is called the "ruffianly style of dress" or the slouchy
appearance of a half-unbottoned vest, and suspenderless pantaloons. That
sort of affectation is, if possible, even more disgusting than the
painfully elaborate frippery of the dandy or dude. Keep your clothes well
brushed and keep them cleaned. Slight spots can be removed with a little
sponge and soap and water.

6. A gentleman should never wear a high hat unless he has on a frock coat
or a dress suit.

7. A man's jewelry should be good and simple. Brass or false jewelry, like
other forms of falsehood, is vulgar. Wearing many cheap decorations is a
serious fault. {87}

8. If a man wears a ring it should be on the third finger of the left hand.
This is the only piece of jewelry a man is allowed to wear that does not
serve a purpose.

9. Wearing imitations of diamonds is always in very bad taste.

10. Every man looks better in a full beard it he keeps it well trimmed. If
a man shaves he should shave at least every other day, unless he is in the
country.

11. The finger-nails should be kept cut, and the teeth should be cleaned
every morning, and kept clear from tartar. A man who does not keep his
teeth clean does not look like a gentleman when he shows them.

       *       *       *       *       *


{88}

Dress.

  We sacrifice to dress, till household joys
  And comforts cease. Dress drains our cellar dry,
  And keeps our larder lean. Puts out our fires,
  And introduces hunger, frost and woe,
  Where peace and hospitality might reign.--COWPER.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

1. GOD IS A LOVER OF DRESS.--We cannot but feel that God is a lover of
dress. He has put on robes of beauty and glory upon all his works. Every
flower is dressed in richness; every field blushes beneath a mantle of
beauty; every star is veiled in brightness; every bird is clothed in the
{89} habiliments of the most exquisite taste. The cattle upon the thousand
hills are dressed by the hand divine. Who, studying God in his works, can
doubt, that he will smile upon the evidence of correct taste manifested by
his children in clothing the forms he has made them?

2. LOVE OF DRESS.--To love dress is not to be a slave of fashion; to love
dress only is the test of such homage. To transact the business of charity
in a silken dress, and to go in a carriage to the work, injures neither the
work nor the worker. The slave of fashion is one who assumes the livery of
a princess, and then omits the errand of the good human soul; dresses in
elegance, and goes upon no good errand, and thinks and does nothing of
value to mankind.

3. BEAUTY IN DRESS.--Beauty in dress is a good thing, rail at it who may.
But it is a lower beauty, for which a higher beauty should not be
sacrificed. They love dresses too much who give it their first thought,
their best time, or all their money; who for it neglect the culture of
their mind or heart, or the claims of others on their service; who care
more for their dress than their disposition; who are troubled more by an
unfashionable bonnet than a neglected duty.

4. SIMPLICITY OF DRESS.--Female lovliness never appears to so good
advantage as when set off by simplicity of dress. No artist ever decks his
angels with towering feathers and gaudy jewelry; and our dear human
angels--if they would make good their title to that name--should carefully
avoid ornaments, which properly belong to Indian squaws and African
princesses. These tinselries may serve to give effect on the stage, or upon
the ball room floor, but in daily life there is no substitute for the charm
of simplicity. A vulgar taste is not to be disguised by gold or diamonds.
The absence of a true taste and refinement of delicacy cannot be
compensated for by the possession of the most princely fortune. Mind
measures gold, but gold cannot measure mind. Through dress the mind may be
read, as through the delicate tissue the lettered page. A modest woman will
dress modestly; a really refined and intelligent woman will bear the marks
of careful selection and faultless taste.

5. PEOPLE OF SENSE.--A coat that has the mark of use upon it, is a
recommendation to the people of sense, and a hat with too much nap, and too
high lustre, a derogatory circumstance. The best coats in our streets are
worn on the backs of penniless fops, broken down merchants, clerks with
pitiful salaries, and men that do not pay up. The heaviest gold chains
dangle from the fobs of gamblers and gentlemen of very limited means;
costly ornaments on {90} ladies, indicate to the eyes that are well opened,
the fact of a silly lover or husband cramped for funds.

6. PLAIN AND NEAT.--When a pretty woman goes by in plain and neat apparel,
it is the presumption that she has fair expectations, and a husband that
can show a balance in his favor. For women are like books,--too much
gilding makes men suspicious, that the binding is the most important part.
The body is the shell of the soul, and the dress is the husk of the body;
but the husk generally tells what the kernel is. As a fashionably dressed
young lady passed some gentlemen, one of them raised his hat, whereupon
another, struck by the fine appearance of the lady, made some inquiries
concerning her, and was answered thus: "She makes a pretty ornament in her
father's house, but otherwise is of no use."

7. THE RICHEST DRESS.--The richest dress is always worn on the soul. The
adornments that will not perish, and that all men most admire, shine from
the heart through this life. God has made it our highest, holiest duty, to
dress the soul he has given us. It is wicked to waste it in frivolity. It
is a beautiful, undying, precious thing. If every young woman would think
of her soul when she looks in the glass, would hear the cry of her naked
mind when she dallies away her precious hours at her toilet, would listen
to the sad moaning of her hollow heart, as it wails through her idle,
useless life, something would be done for the elevation of womanhood.

8. DRESSING UP.--Compare a well-dressed body with a well-dressed mind.
Compare a taste for dress with a taste for knowledge, culture, virtue, and
piety. Dress up an ignorant young woman in the "height of fashion"; put on
plumes and flowers, diamonds and gewgaws; paint her face, girt up her
waist, and I ask you, if this side of a painted and feathered savage you
can find anything more unpleasant to behold. And yet such young women we
meet by the hundred every day on the street and in all our public places.
It is awful to think of.

9. DRESS AFFECTS OUR MANNERS.--A man who is badly dressed, feels chilly,
sweaty, and prickly. He stammers, and does not always tell the truth. He
means to, perhaps, but he can't. He is half distracted about his
pantaloons, which are much to short, and are constantly hitching up; or his
frayed jacket and crumpled linen harrow his soul, and quite unman him. He
treads on the train of a lady's dress, and says, "Thank you", sits down on
his hat, and wishes the "desert were his dwelling place."

       *       *       *       *       *


{91}

Beauty.

 "She walks in beauty, like the night
    Of cloudless climes and starry skies:
  And all that's best of dark and bright
    Meet her in aspect and in her eyes;
  Thus mellowed to that tender light
    Which heaven to gaudy day denies."--BYRON.

[Illustration]

1. THE HIGHEST STYLE OF BEAUTY.--The highest style of beauty to be found in
nature pertains to the human form, as animated and lighted up by the
intelligence within. It is the expression of the soul that constitutes this
superior beauty. It is that which looks out of the eye, which sits in calm
majesty on the brow, lurks on the lip, smiles on the cheek, is set forth in
the chiselled lines and features of the countenance, in the general contour
of figure and form, in the movement, and gesture, and tone; it is this
looking out of the invisible spirit that dwells within, this manifestation
of the higher nature, that we admire and love; this constitutes to us the
beauty of our species. {92}

2. BEAUTY WHICH PERISHES NOT.--There is a beauty which perishes not. It is
such as the angels wear. It forms the washed white robes of the saints. It
wreathes the countenance of every doer of good. It adorns every honest
face. It shines in the virtuous life. It molds the hands of charity. It
sweetens the voice of sympathy. It sparkles on the brow of wisdom. It
flashes in the eye of love. It breathes in the spirit of piety. It is the
beauty of the heaven of heavens. It is that which may grow by the hand of
culture in every human soul. It is the flower of the spirit which blossoms
on the tree of life. Every soul may plant and nurture it in its own garden,
in its own Eden.

3. WE MAY ALL BE BEAUTIFUL.--This is the capacity of beauty that God has
given to the human soul, and this the beauty placed within the reach of
all. We may all be beautiful. Though our forms may be uncomely and our
features not the prettiest, our spirits may be beautiful. And this inward
beauty always shines through. A beautiful heart will flash out in the eye.
A lovely soul will glow in the face. A sweet spirit will tune the voice,
wreathe the countenance in charms. Oh, there is a power in interior beauty
that melts the hardest heart!

4. WOMAN THE MOST PERFECT TYPE OF BEAUTY.--Woman, by common consent, we
regard as the most perfect type of beauty on earth. To her we ascribe the
highest charms belonging to this wonderful element so profusely mingled in
all God's works. Her form is molded and finished in exquisite delicacy of
perfection. The earth gives us no form more perfect, no features more
symmetrical, no style more chaste, no movements more graceful, no finish
more complete; so that our artists ever have and ever will regard the
woman-form of humanity as the most perfect earthly type of beauty. This
form is most perfect and symmetrical in the youth of womanhood; so that the
youthful woman is earth's queen of beauty. This is true, not only by the
common consent of mankind, but also by the strictest rules of scientific
criticism.

[Illustration: A REJECTED LOVER.]

5. FADELESS BEAUTY.--There cannot be a picture without its bright spots;
and the steady contemplation of what is bright in others, has a reflex
influence upon the beholder. It reproduces what it reflects. Nay, it seems
to leave an impress even upon the countenance. The feature, from having a
dark, sinister aspect, becomes open, serene, and sunny. A countenance so
impressed, has neither the vacant stare of the idiot, nor the crafty,
penetrating look of the basilisk, but the clear, placid aspect of truth and
goodness. The woman {94} who has such a face is beautiful. She has a beauty
which changes not with the features, which fades not with years. It is
beauty of expression. It is the only kind of beauty which can be relied
upon for a permanent influence with the other sex. The violet will soon
cease to smile. Flowers must fade. The love that has nothing but beauty to
sustain it, soon withers away.

6. A PRETTY WOMAN PLEASES THE EYE, a good woman, the heart. The one is a
jewel, the other a treasure. Invincible fidelity, good humor, and
complacency of temper, outlive all the charms of a fine face, and make the
decay of it invisible. That is true beauty which has not only a substance,
but a spirit; a beauty that we must intimately know to justly appreciate.

7. THE WOMAN YOU LOVE BEST.--Beauty, dear reader, is probably the woman you
love best, but we trust it is the beauty of soul and character, which sits
in calm majesty on the brow, lurks on the lip, and will outlive what is
called a fine face.

8. THE WEARING OF ORNAMENTS.--Beauty needs not the foreign aid of ornament,
but is when unadorned adorned the most, is a trite observation; but with a
little qualification it is worthy of general acceptance. Aside from the
dress itself, ornaments should be very sparingly used--at any rate, the
danger lies in over-loading oneself, and not in using too few. A young
girl, and especially one of a light and airy style of beauty, should never
wear gems. A simple flower in her hair or on her bosom is all that good
taste will permit. When jewels or other ornaments are worn, they should be
placed where you desire the eye of the spectator to rest, leaving the parts
to which you do not want attention called as plain and negative as
possible. There is no surer sign of vulgarity than a profusion of heavy
jewelry carried about upon the person.

[Illustration]

{95}

Sensible Helps to Beauty.

[Illustration]

1. FOR SCRAWNY NECK.--Take off your tight collars, feather boas and such
heating things. Wash neck and chest with hot water, then rub in sweet oil
all that you can work in. Apply this every night before you retire and
leave the skin damp with it while you sleep.

2. FOR RED HANDS.--Keep your feet warm by soaking them often in hot water,
and keep your hands out of the water as much as possible. Rub your hands
with the skin of a lemon and it will whiten them. If your skin will bear
glycerine after you have washed, pour into the palm a little glycerine and
lemon juice mixed, and rub over the hands and wipe off.

3. NECK AND FACE.--Do not bathe the neck and face just before or after
being out of doors. It tends to wrinkle the skin.

4. SCOWLS.--Never allow yourself to scowl, even if the sun be in your eyes.
That scowl will soon leave its trace and no beauty will outlive it. {96}

5. WRINKLED FOREHEAD.--If you wrinkle your forehead when you talk or read,
visit an oculist and have your eyes tested, and then wear glasses to fit
them.

6. OLD LOOKS.--Sometimes your face looks old because it is tired. Then
apply the following wash and it will make you look younger: Put three drops
of ammonia, a little borax, a tablespoonful of bay rum, and a few drops of
camphor into warm water and apply to your face. Avoid getting it into your
eyes.

7. THE BEST COSMETIC.--Squeeze the juice of a lemon into a pint of sweet
milk. Wash the face with it every night and in the morning wash off with
warm rain water. This will produce a very beautiful effect upon the skin.

8. SPOTS ON THE FACE.--Moles and many other discolorations may be removed
from the face by a preparation composed of one part chemically pure
carbolic acid and two parts pure glycerine. Touch the spots with a
camel's-hair pencil, being careful that the preparation does not come in
contact with the adjacent skin. Five minutes after touching, bathe with
soft water and apply a little vaseline. It may be necessary to repeat the
operation, but if persisted in, the blemishes will be entirely removed.

9. WRINKLES.--This prescription is said to cure wrinkles: Take one ounce of
white wax and melt it to a gentle heat. Add two ounces of the juice of lily
bulbs, two ounces of honey, two drams of rose water, and a drop or two of
ottar of roses. Apply twice a day, rubbing the wrinkles the wrong way.
Always use tepid water for washing the face.

10. THE HAIR.--The hair must be kept free from dust or it will fall out.
One of the best things for cleaning it, is a raw egg rubbed into the roots
and then washed out in several waters. The egg furnishes material for the
hair to grow on, while keeping the scalp perfectly clean. Apply once a
month.

11. LOSS OF HAIR.--When through sickness or headache the hair falls out,
the following tonic may be applied with good effect: Use one ounce of
glycerine, one ounce of bay rum, one pint of strong sage tea, and apply
every other night, rubbing well into the scalp.

       *       *       *       *       *


{97}

How to Keep the Bloom and Grace of Youth.

THE SECRET OF ITS PRESERVATION.

[Illustration: MRS. WM. MCKINLEY.]

1. The question most often asked by women is regarding the art of
retaining, with advancing years, the bloom and grace of youth. This secret
is not learned through the analysis of chemical compounds, but by a
thorough study of nature's laws peculiar to their sex. It is useless for
women with wrinkled faces, dimmed eyes and blemished skins to seek for
external applications of beautifying balms and lotions to bring the glow of
life and health into the face, and yet there are truths, simple yet
wonderful, whereby the bloom of early life can be restored and retained, as
should be the heritage of all God's children, sending the light of beauty
into every woman's face. The secret:

2. Do not bathe in hard water; soften it with a few drops of ammonia, or a
little borax.

3. Do not bathe the face while it is very warm, and never use very cold
water.

4. Do not attempt to remove dust with cold water; give your face a hot
bath, using plenty of good soap, then give it a thorough rinsing with warm
water.

5. Do not rub your face with a coarse towel.

6. Do not believe you can remove wrinkles by filling in the crevices with
powder. Give your face a Russian bath every night; that is, bathe it with
water so hot that you wonder how you can bear it, and then, a minute after,
with moderately cold water, that will make your face glow with warmth; dry
it with a soft towel.

       *       *       *       *       * {98}


Form and Deformity.

[Illustration: MALE. FEMALE.
Showing the Difference in Form and Proportion.]

1. PHYSICAL DEFORMITIES.--Masquerading is a modern accomplishment. Girls
wear tight shoes, burdensome skirts, corsets, etc., all of which prove so
fatal to their health. At the age of seventeen or eighteen, our "young
ladies" are sorry specimens of feminality; and palpitators, cosmetics and
all the modern paraphernalia are required to make them appear fresh and
blooming. Man is equally at fault. A devotee to all the absurd devices of
fashion, he practically asserts that "dress makes the man." But physical
deformities are of far less importance than moral imperfections.

2. DEVELOPMENT OF THE INDIVIDUAL.--It is not possible for human beings to
attain their full stature of humanity, except by loving long and perfectly.
Behold that venerable man! he is mature in judgment, perfect in every
action and expression, and saintly in goodness. You almost worship as you
behold. What rendered him thus perfect? What {99} rounded off his natural
asperities, and moulded up his virtues? Love, mainly. It permeated every
pore, and seasoned every fibre of his being, as could nothing else. Mark
that matronly woman. In the bosom of her family she is more than a queen
and goddess combined. All her looks and actions express the outflowing of
some or all of the human virtues. To know her is to love her. She became
thus perfect, not in a day or year, but by a long series of appropriate
means. Then by what? Chiefly in and by love, which is specially adapted
thus to develop this maturity.

3. PHYSICAL STATURE.--Men and women generally increase in stature until the
twenty-fifth year, and it is safe to assume, that perfection of function is
not established until maturity of bodily development is completed. The
physical contour of these representations plainly exhibits the difference
in structure, and also implies difference of function. Solidity and
strength are represented by the organization of the male, grace and beauty
by that of the female. His broad shoulders represent physical power and the
right of dominion, while her bosom is the symbol of love and nutrition.

HOW TO DETERMINE A PERFECT HUMAN FIGURE.

[Illustration: Lady's Dress in the days of Greece.]

The proportions of the perfect human figure are strictly mathematical. The
whole figure is six times the length of the foot. Whether the form be
slender or plump, this rule holds good. Any deviation from it is a
departure from the highest beauty of proportion. The Greeks made all their
statues according to this rule. The face, from the highest point of the
forehead, where the hair begins, to the end of the chin, is one-tenth of
the whole stature. The hand, from the wrist to the end of the middle
finger, is the same. The chest is a fourth, and from the nipples to the top
of the head is the same. From the top of the chest to the highest point of
the forehead is a seventh. If the length of the face, from the roots of the
hair to the chin, be divided into three equal parts, the first division
determines the point where the eyebrows meet, and the second the place of
the nostrils. The navel is the central point of the human body, and if a
man should lie on his back with his arms and legs extended, the periphery
of the circle which might be described around him, with the navel for its
center, would touch the extremities of his hands and feet. The height from
the feet to the top of the head is the same as the {100} distance from the
extremity of one hand to the extremity of the other when the arms are
extended.

The Venus de Medici is considered the most perfect model of the female
forms, and has been the admiration of the world for ages. Alexander Walker,
after minutely describing this celebrated statue, says: "All these
admirable characteristics of the female form, the mere existence of which
in woman must, one is temped to imagine, be, even to herself, a source of
ineffable pleasure, these constitute a being worthy, as the personification
of beauty, of occupying the temples of Greece; present an object finer,
alas, than Nature even seems capable of producing; and offer to all nations
and ages a theme of admiration and delight." Well might Thomson say:

  So stands the statue that enchants the world,
  So, bending, tries to vail the matchless boast--
  The mingled beauties of exulting Greece.

We beg our readers to observe the form of the waist (evidently innocent of
corsets and tight dresses) of this model woman, and also that of the Greek
Slave in the accompanying outlines. These forms are such as unperverted
nature and the highest art alike require. To compress the waist, and
thereby change its form, pushing the ribs inward, displacing the vital
organs, and preventing the due expansion of the lungs, is as destructive to
beauty as it is to health. {101}

THE HISTORY, MYSTERY, BENEFITS AND INJURIES OF THE CORSET.

[Illustration: The Corset in the 18th Century.]

1. The origin of the corset is lost in remote antiquity. The figures of the
early Egyptian women show clearly an artificial shape of the waist produced
by some style of corset. A similar style of dress must also have prevailed
among the ancient Jewish maidens; for Isaiah, in calling upon the women to
put away their personal adornments, says: "Instead of a girdle there shall
be a rent, and instead of a stomacher (corset) a girdle of sackcloth."

2. Homer also tells us of the cestus or girdle of Venus, which was borrowed
by the haughty Juno with a view to increasing her personal attractions,
that Jupiter might be a more tractable and orderly husband.

3. Coming down to the later times, we find the corset was used in France
and England as early as the 12th century.

4. The most extensive and extreme use of the corset occurred in the 16th
century, during the reign of Catherine de Medici of France and Queen
Elizabeth of England. With Catherine de Medici a thirteen-inch waist
measurement was considered the standard of fashion, while a thick waist was
an abomination. No lady could consider her figure of proper shape unless
she could span her waist with her two hands. To produce this result a
strong rigid corset was worn night and day until the waist was laced down
to the required size. Then over this corset was placed the steel apparatus
shown in the illustration on next page. This corset-cover reached from the
hip to the throat, and {102} produced a rigid figure over which the dress
would fit with perfect smoothness.

5. During the 18th century corsets were largely made from a species of
leather known as "Bend," which was not unlike that used for shoe soles, and
measured nearly a quarter of an inch in thickness. One of the most popular
corsets of the time was the corset and stomacher shown in the accompanying
illustration.

[Illustration: Steel Corset worn in Catherine's time.]

6. About the time of the French Revolution a reaction set in against tight
lacing, and for a time there was a return to the early classical Greek
costume. This style of dress prevailed, with various modifications, until
about 1810, when corsets and tight lacing again returned with threefold
fury. Buchan, a prominent writer of this period, says that it was by no
means uncommon to see "a mother lay her daughter down upon the carpet, and,
placing her foot upon her back, break half a dozen laces in tightening her
stays."

7. It is reserved to our own time to demonstrate that corsets and tight
lacing do not necessarily go hand in hand. Distortion and feebleness are
not beauty. A proper proportion should exist between the size of the waist
and the breadth of the shoulders and hips, and if the waist is diminished
below this proportion, it suggests disproportion and invalidism rather than
grace and beauty.

8. The perfect corset is one which possesses just that degree of rigidity
which will prevent it from wrinkling, but will at the same time allow
freedom in the bending and twisting of the body. Corsets boned with
whalebone, horn or steel are necessarily stiff, rigid and uncomfortable.
After a few days' wear the bones or steels become bent and set in position,
or, as more frequently happens, they break and cause injury or discomfort
to the wearer.

9. About seven years ago an article was discovered for the stiffening of
corsets, which has revolutionized the corset industry of the world. This
article is manufactured from {103} the natural fibers of the Mexican Ixtle
plant, and is known as Coraline. It consists of straight, stiff fibers like
bristles bound together into a cord by being wound with two strands of
thread passing in opposite directions. This produces an elastic fiber
intermediate in stiffness between twine and whalebone. It cannot break, but
it possesses all the stiffness and flexibility necessary to hold the corset
in shape and prevent its wrinkling.

We congratulate the ladies of to-day upon the advantages they enjoy over
their sisters of two centuries ago, in the forms and the graceful and easy
curves of the corsets now made as compared with those of former times.

[Illustration: Forms of Corsets in the time of Elizabeth of England.]

{104}

TIGHT-LACING.

[Illustration: EGYPTIAN CORSET.]

[Illustration: THE NATURAL WAIST.
THE EFFECTS OF LACING.]

It destroys natural beauty and creates an unpleasant and irritable temper.
A tight-laced chest and a good disposition cannot go together. The human
form has been molded by nature, the best shape is undoubtedly that which
she has given it. To endeavor to render it more elegant by artificial means
is to change it; to make it much smaller below and much larger above is to
destroy its beauty; to keep it cased up in a kind of domestic cuirass is
not only to deform it, but to expose the internal parts to serious injury.
Under such compression as is commonly practiced by ladies, the {105}
development of the bones, which are still tender, does not take place
conformably to the intention of nature, because nutrition is necessarily
stopped, and they consequently become twisted and deformed.

Those who wear these appliances of tight-lacing often complain that they
cannot sit upright without them--are sometimes, indeed, compelled to wear
them during all the twenty-four hours; a fact which proves to what extent
such articles weaken the muscles of the trunk. The injury does not fall
merely on the internal structure of the body, but also on its beauty, and
on the temper and feelings with which that beauty is associated. Beauty is
in reality but another name for expression of countenance, which is the
index of sound health, intelligence, good feelings and peace of mind. All
are aware that uneasy feelings, existing habitually in the breast speedily
exhibit their signature on the countenance, and that bitter thoughts or a
bad temper spoil the human expression of its comeliness and grace.

       *       *       *       *       *


{107}

The Care of the Hair.

[Illustration: NATURAL HAIR.]

1. THE COLOR OF THE HAIR.--The color of the hair corresponds with that of
the skin--being dark or black, with a dark complexion, and red or yellow
with a fair skin. When a white skin is seen in conjunction with black hair,
as among the women of Syria and Barbary, the apparent exception arises from
protection from the sun's rays, and opposite colors are often found among
people of one prevailing feature. Thus red-haired Jews are not uncommon,
though the nation in general have dark complexion and hair.

2. THE IMPERISHABLE NATURE OF HAIR.--The imperishable nature of hair arises
from the combination of salt and metals in its composition. In old tombs
and on mummies it has been found in a perfect state, after a lapse of over
two thousand years. There are many curious accounts proving the
indestructibility of the human hair.

3. TUBULAR.--In the human family the hairs are tubular, the tubes being
intersected by partitions, resembling in some degree the cellular tissue of
plants. Their hollowness prevents incumbrance from weight, while their
power of resistance is increased by having their traverse sections rounded
in form.

4. CAUTIONS.--It is ascertained that a full head of hair, beard and
whiskers, are a prevention against colds and consumptions. Occasionally,
however, it is found necessary to remove the hair from the head, in cases
of fever or disease, to stay the inflammatory symptoms, and to relieve the
brain. The head should invariably be kept cool. Close night-caps are
unhealthy, and smoking-caps and coverings for the head within doors are
alike detrimental to the free growth of the hair, weakening it, and causing
it to fall out.

HOW TO BEAUTIFY AND PRESERVE THE HAIR.

1. TO BEAUTIFY THE HAIR.--Keep the head clean, the pores of the skin open,
and the whole circulatory system in a healthy condition, and you will have
no need of bear's grease (alias hog's lard). Where there is a tendency in
the hair to fall off on account of the weakness or sluggishness of the
circulation, or an unhealthy state of the skin, cold water and friction
with a tolerably stiff brush are probably the best remedial agents.

2. BARBER'S SHAMPOOS.--Are very beneficial if properly prepared. They
should not be made too strong. Avoid strong shampoos of any kind. Great
caution should be exercised in this matter. {108}

3. CARE OF THE HAIR.--To keep the hair healthy, keep the head clean. Brush
the scalp well with a stiff brush, while dry. Then wash with castile soap,
and rub into the roots, bay rum, brandy or camphor water. This done twice a
month will prove beneficial. Brush the scalp thoroughly twice a week.
Dampen the hair with soft water at the toilet, and do not use oil.

4. HAIR WASH.--Take one ounce of borax, half an ounce of camphor
powder--these ingredients fine--and dissolve them in one quart of boiling
water. When cool, the solution will be ready for use. Dampen the hair
frequently. This wash is said not only to cleanse and beautify, but to
strengthen the hair, preserve the color and prevent baldness.

ANOTHER EXCELLENT WASH.--The best wash we know for cleansing and softening
the hair is an egg beaten up and rubbed well into the hair, and afterwards
washed out with several washes of warm water.

5. THE ONLY SENSIBLE AND SAFE HAIR OIL.--The following is considered a most
valuable preparation: Take of extract of yellow Peruvian bark, fifteen
grains; extract of rhatany root, eight grains; extract of burdoch root and
oil of nutmegs (fixed), of each two drachms; camphor (dissolve with spirits
of wine), fifteen grains; beef marrow, two ounces; best olive oil, one
ounce; citron juice, half a drachm; aromatic essential oil, as much as
sufficient to render it fragrant; mix and make into an ointment. Two
drachms of bergamot, and a few drops of attar of roses would suffice.

6. HAIR WASH.--A good hair wash is soap and water, and the oftener it is
applied the freer the surface of the head will be from scurf. The
hair-brush should also be kept in requisition morning and evening.

7. TO REMOVE SUPERFLUOUS HAIR.--With those who dislike the use of arsenic,
the following is used for removing superfluous hair from the skin: Lime,
one ounce; carbonate of potash, two ounces; charcoal powder, one drachm.
For use, make it into a paste with a little warm water, and apply it to the
part, previously shaved close. As soon as it has become thoroughly dry, it
may be washed off with a little warm water.

8. COLORING FOR EYELASHES AND EYEBROWS.--In eyelashes the chief element of
beauty consists in their being long and glossy; the eyebrows should be
finely arched and clearly divided from each other. The most innocent
darkener of the brow is the expressed juice of the elderberry, or a burnt
clove. {109}

[Illustration: DISCUSSING THE FASHIONS.]

9. CRIMPING HAIR.--To make the hair stay in crimps, take five cents worth
of gum arabic and add to it just enough boiling water to dissolve it. When
dissolved, add enough alcohol to make it rather thin. Let this stand all
night and then bottle it to prevent the alcohol from evaporating. This put
on the hair at night, after it is done up in papers or pins, will make it
stay in crimp the hottest day, and is perfectly harmless.

10. TO CURL THE HAIR.--There is no preparation that will make naturally
straight hair assume a permanent curl. The following will keep the hair in
curl for a short time: Take borax, two ounces; gum arabic, one drachm; and
hot {110} water, not boiling, one quart; stir, and, as soon as the
ingredients are dissolved, add three tablespoonfuls of strong spirits of
camphor. On retiring to rest, wet the hair with the above liquid, and roll
in twists of paper as usual. Do not disturb the hair until morning, when
untwist and form into ringlets.

11. FOR FALLING OR LOOSENING OF THE HAIR.--Take:

  Alcohol, a half pint.
  Salt, as much as will dissolve.
  Glycerine, a tablespoonful.
  Flour of sulphur, teaspoonful. Mix.

Rub on the scalp every morning.

12. TO DARKEN THE HAIR WITHOUT BAD EFFECTS.--Take:

  Blue vitriol (powdered), one drachm.
  Alcohol, one ounce.
  Essence of roses, ten drops.
  Rain-water, a half-pint.

Shake together until they are thoroughly dissolved.

13. GRAY HAIR.--There are no known means by which the hair can be prevented
from turning gray, and none which can restore it to its original hue,
except through the process of dyeing. The numerous "hair color restorers"
which are advertised are chemical preparations which act in the manner of a
dye or as a paint, and are nearly always dependent for their power on the
presence of lead. This mineral, applied to the skin, for a long time, will
lead to the most disastrous maladies--lead-palsy, lead colic, and other
symptoms of poisoning. It should, therefore, never be used for this
purpose.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *


{111}

How to Cure Pimples or Other Facial Eruptions.

[Illustration]

1. It requires self-denial to get rid of pimples, for persons troubled with
them will persist in eating fat meats and other articles of food calculated
to produce them. Avoid the use of rich gravies, or pastry, or anything of
the kind in excess. Take all the out-door exercise yon can and never
indulge in a late supper. Retire at a reasonable hour, and rise early in
the morning. Sulphur to purify the blood may be taken three times a week--a
thimbleful in a glass of milk before breakfast. It takes some time for the
sulphur to do its work, therefore persevere in its use till the humors, or
pimples, or blotches, disappear. Avoid getting wet while taking the
sulphur.

2. TRY THIS RECIPE: Wash the face twice a day in warm water, and rub dry
with a coarse towel. Then with a soft towel rub in a lotion made of two
ounces of white brandy, one ounce of cologne, and one-half ounce of liquor
potassa. {112} Persons subject to skin eruptions should avoid very salty or
fat food. A dose of Epsom salts occasionally might prove beneficial.

3. Wash the face in a dilution of carbolic acid, allowing one teaspoonful
to a pint of water. This is an excellent and purifying lotion, and may be
used on the most delicate skins. Be careful about letting this wash get
into the eyes.

4. Oil of sweet almonds, one ounce; fluid potash, one drachm. Shake well
together, and then add rose water, one ounce; pure water, six ounces. Mix.
Rub the pimples or blotches for some minutes with a rough towel, and then
dab them with the lotion.

5. Dissolve one ounce of borax, and sponge the face with it every night.
When there are insects, rub on flower of sulphur dry after washing, rub
well and wipe dry; use plenty of castile soap.

6. Dilute corrosive sublimate with oil of almonds. A few days' application
will remove them.

       *       *       *       *       *

BLACK-HEADS AND FLESH WORMS.

[Illustration: A Regular Flesh Worm Greatly Magnified.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A HEALTHY COMPLEXION.]

This is a minute little creature, scientifically called _Demodex
folliculorum_, hardly visible to the naked eye, with comparatively large
fore body, a more slender hind body and eight little stumpy processes that
do duty as legs. No specialized head is visible, although of course there
is a mouth orifice. These creatures live on the sweat glands or pores of
the human face, and owing to the appearance that they give to the infested
pores, they are usually known as "black-heads." It is not at all uncommon
to see an otherwise pretty face disfigured by these ugly creatures,
although the insects themselves are nearly transparent white. The black
appearance is really due the accumulation of dirt which gets under the
edges of the skin of the enlarged sweat glands and cannot be removed in the
ordinary way by washing, because the abnormal, hardened secretion of the
gland itself becomes stained. These insects are so lowly organized that it
is almost impossible to satisfactorily deal with them. {113} and they
sometimes cause the continual festering of the skin which they inhabit.

REMEDY.--Press them out with a hollow key or with the thumb and fingers,
and apply a mixture of sulphur and cream every evening. Wash every morning
with the best toilet soap, or wash the face with hot water with a soft
flannel at bedtime.

       *       *       *       *       *


{114}

Love.

  But there's nothing half so sweet in life
  As love's young dream.--MOORE.

              All love is sweet,
  Given or returned. Common as light is love,
  And its familiar voice wearies not ever.--SHELLEY.

  Doubt thou the stars are fire,
    Doubt that the sun doth move;
  Doubt truth to be a liar,
    But never doubt I love.--SHAKESPEARE.

  Let those love now who never loved before,
  Let those that always loved now love the more.--PARNELL.

[Illustration: LOVE'S YOUNG DREAM.]

1. LOVE BLENDS YOUNG HEARTS.--Love blends young hearts in blissful unity,
and, for the time, so ignores past ties and affections, as to make willing
separation of the son from his father's house, and the daughter from all
the sweet endearments of her childhood's home, to go out together, and rear
for themselves an altar, around which shall cluster all the cares and
delights, the anxieties and sympathies, of the family relationship; this
love, if pure, unselfish, and discreet, constitutes the chief usefulness
and happiness of human life.

2. WITHOUT LOVE.--Without love there would be no organized households, and,
consequently, none of that earnest endeavor for competence and
respectability, which is the mainspring to human effort; none of those
sweet, softening, restraining and elevating influences of domestic life,
which can alone fill the earth with the glory of the Lord and make glad the
city of Zion. This love is indeed heaven upon earth; but above would not be
heaven without it; where there is not love, there is fear; but, "love
casteth out fear." And yet we naturally do offend what we most love.

3. LOVE IS THE SUN OF LIFE.--Most beautiful in morning and evening, but
warmest and steadiest at noon. It is the sun of the soul. Life without love
is worse than death; a world without a sun. The love which does not lead to
labor will soon die out, and the thankfulness which does not embody itself
in sacrifices is already changing to gratitude. Love is not ripened in one
day, nor in many, nor even in a human lifetime. It is the oneness of soul
with soul in appreciation and perfect trust. To be blessed it must rest in
that faith in the Divine which underlies every other motion. To be true, it
must be eternal as God himself.

4. LOVE IS DEPENDENT.--Remember that love is dependent upon forms; courtesy
of etiquette guards and protects courtesy of heart. How many hearts have
been lost irrevocably, and how many averted eyes and cold looks have been
gained from what seemed, perhaps, but a trifling negligence of forms?

{116}

[Illustration: LOVE MAKING IN THE EARLY COLONIAL DAYS.]

5. RADICAL DIFFERENCES.--Men and women should not be judged by the same
rules. There are many radical differences in their affectional natures. Man
is the creature of interest and ambition. His nature leads him forth into
the struggle and bustle of the world. Love is but the embellishment of his
early life, or a song piped in the intervals of the acts. He seeks for
fame, for fortune, for space in the world's thoughts, and dominion over his
fellow-men. But a woman's whole life is a history of the affections. The
heart is her world; it is there her ambition strives for empire; it is
there her ambition seeks for hidden treasures. She sends forth her
sympathies on adventure; she embarks her whole soul in the traffic of
affection; and if shipwrecked her case is hopeless, for it is bankruptcy of
the heart.

6. WOMAN'S LOVE.--Woman's love is stronger than death; it rises superior to
adversity, and towers in sublime beauty above the niggardly selfishness of
the world. Misfortune cannot suppress it; enmity cannot alienate it;
temptation cannot enslave it. It is the guardian angel of the nursery and
the sick bed; it gives an affectionate concord to the partnership of life
and interest, circumstances cannot modify it; it ever remains the same to
sweeten existence, to purify the cup of life, on the rugged pathway to the
grave, and melt to moral pliability the brittle nature of man. It is the
ministering spirit of home, hovering in soothing caresses over the cradle,
and the death-bed of the household, and filling up the urn of all its
sacred memories.

7. A LADY'S COMPLEXION.--He who loves a lady's complexion, form and
features, loves not her true self, but her soul's old clothes. The love
that has nothing but beauty to sustain it, soon withers and dies. The love
that is fed with presents always requires feeding. Love, and love only, is
the loan for love. Love is of the nature of a burning glass, which, kept
still in one place, fireth; changed often, it doth nothing. The purest joy
we can experience in one we love, is to see that person a source of
happiness to others. When you are with the person loved, you have no sense
of being bored. This humble and trivial circumstance is the great test--the
only sure and abiding test of love.

8. TWO SOULS COME TOGETHER.--When two souls come together, each seeking to
magnify the other, each in subordinate sense worshiping the other, each
help the other; the two flying together so that each wing-beat of the one
helps each wing-beat of the other--when two souls come together thus, they
are lovers. They who unitedly move themselves away from grossness and from
earth, toward the throne of crystaline and the pavement golden, are,
indeed, true lovers.

{118}

[Illustration: CUPID'S CAPTURED VICTIM.]

The Power and Peculiarities of Love.

       *       *       *       *       *

LOVE IS A TONIC AND A REMEDY FOR DISEASE, MAKES PEOPLE LOOK YOUNGER,
CREATES INDUSTRY, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

 "All thoughts, all passions, all desires,
    Whatever stirs this mortal frame,
  Are ministers of Love,
    And feed his sacred flame."

1. It is a physological fact long demonstrated that persons possessing a
loving disposition borrow less of the cares of life, and also live much
longer than persons with a strong, narrow and selfish nature. Persons who
love scenery, love domestic animals, show great attachment for all friends;
love their home dearly and find interest and enchantment in almost
everything have qualities of mind and heart which indicate good health and
a happy disposition.

2. Persons who love music and are constantly humming or whistling a tune,
are persons that need not be feared, they are kind-hearted and with few
exceptions possess a loving disposition. Very few good musicians become
criminals.

3. Parents that cultivate a love among then children will find that the
same feeling will soon be manifested in their children's disposition.
Sunshine in the hearts of the parents will blossom in the lives of the
children. The parent who continually cherishes a feeling of dislike and
rebellion in his soul, cultivating moral hatred against his fellow-man,
will soon find the same things manifested by his son. As the son resembles
his father in looks so he will to a certain extent resemble him in
character. Love in the heart of the parent will beget kindness and
affection in the heart of a child. Continuous scolding and fretting in the
home will soon make love a stranger. {119}

[Illustration: THE TURKISH WAY OF MAKING LOVE]

4. If you desire to cultivate love, create harmony in all your feelings and
faculties. Remember that all that is pure, holy and virtuous in love flows
from the deepest fountain of the human soul. Poison the fountain and you
change virtue to vice, and happiness to misery.

5. Love strengthens health, and disappointment cultivates disease. A person
in love will invariably enjoy the best of health. Ninety-nine per cent. of
our strong constitutioned men, now in physical ruin, have wrecked
themselves on the breakers of an unnatural love. Nothing but right love and
a right marriage will restore them to health.

6. All men feel much better for going a courting, providing they court
purely. Nothing tears the life out of man more than lust, vulgar thoughts
and immoral conduct. The libertine or harlot has changed love, God's purest
gift to man, into lust. They cannot acquire love in its purity again, the
sacred flame has vanished forever. Love is pure, and cannot be found in the
heart of a seducer.

7. A woman is never so bright and full of health as when deeply in love.
Many sickly and frail women are snatched from the clutches of some deadly
disease and restored to health by falling in love.

8. It is a long established fact that married persons are healthier than
unmarried persons; thus it proves that health and happiness belong to the
home. Health depends upon mind. Love places the mind into a delightful
state and quickens every human function, makes the blood circulate and
weaves threads of joy into cables of domestic love.

[Illustration: PREPARING TO ENTERTAIN HER LOVER.]

9. An old but true proverb: "A true man loving one woman will speak well of
all women. A true woman loving one man will speak well of all men. A good
wife praises all men, but praises her husband most. A good man praises all
women, but praises his wife most."

10. Persons deeply in love become peculiarly pleasant, winning and tender.
It is said that a musician can never excel or an artist do his best until
he has been deeply in love. A good orator, a great statesman or great men
in general are greater and better for having once been thoroughly in love.
A man who truly loves his wife and home is always a safe man to trust.

11. Love makes people look younger in years. People in unhappy homes look
older and more worn and fatigued. A woman at thirty, well courted and well
married, looks five or ten years younger than a woman of the same age
unhappily married. Old maids and bachelors always look older {120} than
they are. A flirting widow always looks younger than an old maid of like
age.

12. Love renders women industrious and frugal, and a loving husband spends
lavishly on a loved wife and children, though miserly towards others.

13. Love cultivates self-respect and produces beauty. Beauty in walk and
beauty in looks; a girl in love is at her best; it brings out the finest
traits of her character, she walks more erect and is more generous and
forgiving; her voice is sweeter and she makes happy all about her. She
works better, sings better and is better.

14. Now in conclusion, a love marriage is the best life insurance policy;
it pays dividends every day, while every other insurance policy merely
promises to pay after death. Remember that statistics demonstrate that
married people outlive old maids and old bachelors by a goodly number of
years and enjoy healthier and happier lives.

       *       *       *       *       *


{122}

Amativeness or Connubial Love.

[Illustration: CONFIDENCE.]

1. MULTIPLYING THE RACE.--Some means for multiplying our race is necessary
to prevent its extinction by death. Propagation and death appertain to
man's earthly existence. If the Deity had seen fit to bring every member of
the human family into being by a direct act of creative power, without the
agency of parents, the present wise and benevolent arrangements of husbands
and wives, parents and children, friends and neighbors, would have been
superseded, and all opportunities for exercising parental and connubial
love, in which so much enjoyment is taken, cut off. But the domestic
feelings and relations, as now arranged, must strike every philosophical
observer as inimitably beautiful and perfect--as the offspring of infinite
Wisdom and Goodness combined.

2. AMATIVENESS AND ITS COMBINATIONS constitute their origin, counterpart,
and main medium of manifestation. Its primary function is connubial love.
From it, mainly, spring those feelings which exist between the sexes as
such and {123} result in marriage and offspring. Combined with the higher
sentiments, it gives rise to all those reciprocal kind feelings and
nameless courtesies which each sex manifests towards the other; refining
and elevating both, promoting gentility and politeness, and greatly
increasing social and general happiness.

3. RENDERS MEN MORE POLITE TO WOMEN.--So far from being in the least gross
or indelicate, its proper exercise is pure, chaste, virtuous, and even an
ingredient in good manners. It is this which renders men always more polite
towards women than to one another, and more refined in their society, and
which makes women more kind, grateful, genteel and tender towards men than
women. It makes mothers love their sons more than their daughters, and
fathers more attached to their daughters. Man's endearing recollections of
his mother or wife form his most powerful incentives to virtue, study, and
good deeds, as well as restraints upon his vicious inclinations; and, in
proportion as a young man is dutiful and affectionate to his mother, will
he be fond of his wife; for, this faculty is the parent of both.

4. ALL SHOULD CULTIVATE THE FACULTY OF AMATIVENESS OR CONNUBIAL
LORE.--Study the personal charms and mental accomplishments of the other
sex by ardent admirers of beautiful forms, and study graceful movements and
elegant manners, and remember, much depends upon the tones and accents of
the voice. Never be gruff if you desire to be winning. Seek and enjoy and
reciprocate fond looks and feelings. Before you can create favorable
impressions you must first be honest and sincere and natural, and your
conquest will be sure and certain.

       *       *       *       *       *

Love and Common-Sense.

1. Do you love her because she goes to the altar with her head full of book
learning, her hands of no earthly use, save for the piano and brush;
because she has no conception of the duties and responsibilities of a wife;
because she hates housework, hates its everlasting routine and ever
recurring duties; because she hates children and will adopt every means to
evade motherhood; because she loves her ease, loves to have her will
supreme, loves, oh how well, to be free to go and come, to let the days
slip idly by, to be absolved from all responsibility, to live without
labor, without care? Will you love her selfish, shirking, calculating
nature after twenty years of close companionship?

2. Do you love him because he is a man, and therefore, no matter how weak
mentally, morally or physically he may {124} be, he has vested in him the
power to save you from the ignominy of an old maid's existence? Because you
would rather be Mrs. Nobody, than make the effort to be Miss Somebody?
because you have a great empty place in your head and heart that nothing
but a man can fill? because you feel you cannot live without him? God grant
the time may never come when you cannot live with him.

[Illustration: AN EARNEST CALLER.]

3. Do you love her because she is a thoroughly womanly woman; for her
tender sympathetic nature; for the jewels of her life, which are absolute
purity of mind and heart; for the sweet sincerity of her disposition; for
her loving, charitable thought; for her strength of character? because she
is pitiful to the sinful, tender to the sorrowful, capable, self-reliant,
modest, true-hearted? in brief, because she is the embodiment of all
womanly virtues?

4. Do you love him because he is a manly man; because the living and
operating principle of his life is a tender reverence for all women;
because his love is the overflow of the best part of his nature; because he
has never soiled his soul with an unholy act or his lips with an oath;
because mentally he is a man among men; because physically he stands head
and shoulders above the masses; because morally he is far beyond suspicion,
in his thought, word or deed; because his earnest manly consecrated life is
a mighty power on God's side?

5. But there always has been and always will be unhappy marriages until men
learn what husbandhood means; how to care for that tenderly matured,
delicately constituted being, that he takes into his care and keeping. That
if her wonderful adjusted organism is overtaxed and overburdened, her
happiness, which is largely dependent upon her health, is destroyed.

6. Until men give the women they marry the undivided love of their heart;
until constancy is the key-note of a life which speaks eloquently of clean
thoughts and clean hearts.

7. Until men and women recognize that self-control in a man, and modesty in
a woman, will bring a mutual respect that years of wedded life will only
strengthen. Until they recognize that love is the purest and holiest of all
things known to humanity, will marriage continue to bring unhappiness and
discontent, instead of that comfort and restful peace which all loyal souls
have a right to expect and enjoy.

8. Be sensible and marry a sensible, honest and industrious companion, and
happiness through life will be your reward.

{126}

[Illustration]

What Women Love in Men.

1. Women naturally love courage, force and firmness in men. The ideal man
in a woman's eye must be heroic and brave. Woman naturally despises a
coward, and she has little or no respect for a bashful man.

2. Woman naturally loves her lord and master. Women who desperately object
to be overruled, nevertheless admire men who overrule them, and few women
would have any respect for a man whom they could completely rule and
control.

3. Man is naturally the protector of woman; as the male wild animal of the
forest protects the female, so it is natural for man to protect his wife
and children, and therefore woman admires those qualities in a man which
make him a protector.

4. LARGE MEN.--Women naturally love men of strength, size and fine
physique, a tall, large and strong man rather than a short, small and weak
man. A woman always pities a weakly man, but rarely ever has any love for
him.

5. SMALL AND WEAKLY MEN.--All men would be of good size in frame and flesh,
were it not for the infirmities visited upon them by the indiscretion of
parents and ancestors of generations before.

6. YOUTHFUL SEXUAL EXCITEMENT.--There are many children born healthy and
vigorous who destroy the full vigor of their generative organs in youth by
self-abuse, and if they survive and marry, their children will have small
bones, small frames and sickly constitutions. It is therefore not strange
that instinct should lead women to admire men not touched with these
symptoms of physical debility.

7. GENEROSITY.--Woman generally loves a generous man. Religion absorbs a
great amount of money in temples, churches, ministerial salaries, etc., and
ambition and appetite absorb countless millions, yet woman receives more
gifts from man than all these combined: she {127} loves a generous giver.
_Generosity and Gallantry_ are the jewels which she most admires. A woman
receiving presents from a man implies that she will pay him back in love,
and the woman who accepts a man's presents, and does not respect him,
commits a wrong which is rarely ever forgiven.

8. INTELLIGENCE.--Above all other qualities in man, woman admires his
intelligence. Intelligence is man's woman-captivating card. This character
in woman is illustrated by an English army officer, as told by O. S.
Fowler, betrothed in marriage to a beautiful, loving heiress, summoned to
India, who wrote back to her:

"I have lost an eye, a leg, an arm, and been so badly marred and begrimmed
besides, that you never could love this poor, maimed soldier. Yet, I love
you too well to make your life wretched by requiring you to keep your
marriage-vow with me, from which I hereby release you. Find among English
peers one physically more perfect, whom you can love better."

She answered, as all genuine women must answer:

"Your noble mind, your splendid talents, your martial prowess which maimed
you, are what I love. As long as you retain sufficient body to contain the
casket of your soul, which alone is what I admire, I love you all the same,
and long to make you mine forever."

9. SOFT MEN.--All women despise soft and silly men more than all other
defects in their character. Woman never can love a man whose conversation
is flat and insipid. Every man seeking woman's appreciation or love should
always endeavor to show his intelligence and manifest an interest in books
and daily papers. He should read books and inform himself so that he can
talk intelligently upon the various topics of the day. Even an ignorant
woman always loves superior intelligence.

10. SEXUAL VIGOR.--Women love sexual vigor in men. This is human nature.
Weakly and delicate fathers have weak and puny children, though the mother
may be strong and robust. A weak mother often bears strong children, if the
father is physically and sexually vigorous. Consumption is often inherited
from fathers, because they furnish the body, yet more women die with it
because of female obstructions. Hence women love passion in men, because it
endows their offspring with strong functional vigor.

11. PASSIONATE MEN.--The less passion any woman possesses, the more she
prizes a strong passionate man. This is a natural consequence, for if she
married one equally {128} passionless, their children would be poorly
endowed or they would have none; she therefore admires him who makes up the
deficiency. Hence very amorous men prefer quiet, modest and reserved women.

12. HOMELY MEN are admired by women if they are large, strong and vigorous
and possess a good degree of intelligence. Looks are trifles compared with
the other qualities which man may possess.

13. YOUNG MAN, If you desire to win the love and admiration of young
ladies, first, be intelligent; read books and papers; remember what you
read, so you can talk about it. Second, be generous and do not show a
stingy and penurious disposition when in the company of ladies. Third, be
sensible, original, and have opinions of your own and do not agree with
everything that someone else says, or agree with everything that a lady may
say. Ladies naturally admire genteel and intelligent discussions and
conversations when there is someone to talk with who has an opinion of his
own. Woman despises a man who has no opinion of his own; she hates a
trifling disposition and admires leadership, original ideas, and looks up
to man as a leader. Women despise all men whom they can manage, overrule,
cow-down and subdue.

14. BE SELF-SUPPORTING.--The young man who gives evidence of thrift is
always in demand. Be enthusiastic and drive with success all that you
undertake. A young man, sober, honest and industrious, holding a
responsible position or having a business of his own, is a prize that some
bright and beautiful young lady would like to draw. Woman admires a
certainty.

15. UNIFORMED MEN.--It is a well known fact that women love uniformed men.
The soldier figures as a hero in about every tale of fiction and it is said
by good authority that a man in uniform has three more chances to marry
than the man without uniform. The correct reason is, the soldier's
profession is bravery, and he is dressed and trained for that purpose, and
it is that which makes him admired by ladies rather than the uniform which
he wears. His profession is also that of a protector.

       *       *       *       *       *


{129}

[Illustration]
