
THE DESTRUCTIVE EFFECTS OF
CIGARETTE SMOKING.

[Illustration: _Illustrating the shrunken condition of one of the Lungs of
an excessive smoker_]

{449}

Cigarettes have been analyzed, and the most physicians and chemists were
surprised to find how much opium is put into them. A tobacconist himself
says that "the extent to which drugs are used in cigarettes is appalling."
"Havana flavoring" for this same purpose is sold everywhere by the thousand
barrels. This flavoring is made from the tonka-bean, which contains a
deadly poison. The wrappers, warranted to be rice paper, are sometimes made
of common paper, and sometimes of the filthy scrapings of ragpickers
bleached white with arsenic. What a thing for human lungs.

The habit burns up good health, good resolutions, good manners, good
memories, good faculties, and often honesty and truthfulness as well.

Cases of epilepsy, insanity and death are frequently reported as the result
of smoking cigarettes, while such physicians as Dr. Lewis Sayre, Dr.
Hammond, and Sir Morell Mackenzie of England, name heart trouble,
blindness, cancer and other diseases as occasioned by it.

Leading physicians of America unanimously condemn {450} cigarette smoking
as "one of the vilest and most destructive evils that ever befell the youth
of any country," declaring that "its direct tendency is a deterioration of
the race."

Look at the pale, wilted complexion of a boy who indulges in excessive
cigarette smoking. It takes no physician to diagnose his case, and death
will surely mark for his own every boy and young man who will follow up the
habit. It is no longer a matter of guess. It is a scientific fact which the
microscope in every case verifies.

       *       *       *       *       *


{451}

The Dangerous Vices.

[Illustration: INNOCENT YOUTH.]

Few persons are aware of the extent to which masturbation or self-pollution
is practiced by the young of both sexes in civilized society.

SYMPTOMS.

The hollow, sunken eye, the blanched cheek, the withered hands, and
emaciated frame, and the listless life, have other sources than the
ordinary illnesses of all large communities.

When a child, after having given proofs of memory and intelligence,
experiences daily more and more difficulty in retaining and understanding
what is taught him, it is not only from unwillingness and idleness, as is
commonly supposed, but from a disease eating out life itself, brought on by
a self-abuse of the private organs. Besides the slow and progressive
derangement of his or her health, the diminished energy of application, the
languid movement, the stooping gait, the desertion of social games, the
solitary walk, late rising, livid and sunken eye, and many other symptoms,
will fix the attention of every intelligent and competent guardian of youth
that something is wrong.

{453}

MARRIED PEOPLE.

Nor are many persons sufficiently aware of the ruinous extent to which the
amative propensity is indulged by married persons. The matrimonial ceremony
does, indeed, sanctify the act of sexual intercourse, but it can by no
means atone for nor obviate the consequences of its abuse. Excessive
indulgence in the married relation is, perhaps, as much owing to the force
of habit, as to the force of the sexual appetite.

[Illustration: GUARD WELL THE CRADLE.

EDUCATION CANNOT BEGIN TOO YOUNG.]

EXTREME YOUTH.

More lamentable still is the effect of inordinate sexual excitement of the
young and unmarried. It is not very uncommon to find a confirmed onanist,
or, rather, masturbator, who has not yet arrived at the period of puberty.
Many cases are related in which young boys and girls, from eight to ten
years of age, were taught the method of self-pollution by their older
playmates, and had made serious encroachments on the fund of constitutional
vitality even before any considerable degree of sexual appetite was
developed.

FORCE OF HABIT.

Here, again, the fault was not in the power of passion, but in the force of
habit. Parents and guardians of youth can not be too mindful of the
character and habits of those with whom they allow young persons and
children under their charge to associate intimately, and especially careful
should they be with whom they allow them to sleep.

SIN OF IGNORANCE.

It is customary to designate self-pollution as among the "vices." I think
misfortune is the more appropriate term. It is true, that in the
physiological sense, it is one of the very worst "transgressions of the
law." But in the moral sense it is generally the sin of ignorance in the
commencement, and in the end the passive submission to a morbid and almost
resistless impulse.

QUACKS.

The time has come when the rising generation must be thoroughly instructed
in this matter. That quack specific "ignorance" has been experimented with
quite too long already. The true method of insuring all persons, young or
old, against the abuses of any part, organ, function, or faculty of the
wondrous machinery of life, is to teach them its use. "Train a child in the
way it should go" or be sure it {454} will, amid the ten thousand
surrounding temptations, find out a way in which it should not go. Keeping
a child in ignorant innocence is, I aver, no part of the "training" which
has been taught by a wiser than Solomon. Boys and girls do know, will know,
and must know, that between them are important anatomical differences and
interesting physiological relations. Teach them, I repeat, their use, or
expect their abuse. Hardly a young person in the world would ever become
addicted to self-pollution if he or she understood clearly the
consequences; if he or she knew at the outset that the practice was
directly destroying the bodily stamina, vitiating the moral tone, and
enfeebling the intellect. No one would pursue the disgusting habit if he or
she was fully aware that it was blasting all prospects of health and
happiness in the approaching period of manhood and womanhood.

GENERAL SYMPTOMS OF THE SECRET HABIT.

The effects of either self-pollution or excessive sexual indulgence, appear
in many forms. It would seem as if God had written an instinctive law of
remonstrance, in the innate moral sense, against this filthy vice.

All who give themselves up to the excesses of this debasing indulgence,
carry about with them, continually, a consciousness of their defilement,
and cherish a secret suspicion that others look upon them as debased
beings. They feel none of that manly confidence and gallant spirit, and
chaste delight in the presence of virtuous females, which stimulate young
men to pursue the course of ennobling refinement, and mature them for the
social relations and enjoyments of life.

This shamefacedness, or unhappy quailing of the countenance, on meeting the
look of others, often follows them through life, in some instances even
after they have entirely abandoned the habit, and became married men and
respectable members of society.

In some cases, the only complaint the patient will make on consulting you,
is that he is suffering under a kind of continued fever. He will probably
present a hot, dry skin, with something of a hectic appearance. Though all
the ordinary means of arresting such symptoms have been tried, he is none
the better.

The sleep seems to be irregular and unrefreshing--restlessness during the
early part of the night, and in the advanced stages of the disease, profuse
sweats before morning. There is also frequent starting in the sleep, from
{455} disturbing dreams. The characteristic feature is, that your patient
almost always dreams of sexual intercourse. This is one of the earliest, as
well as most constant symptoms. When it occurs most frequently, it is apt
to be accompanied with pain. A gleety discharge from the urethra may also
be frequently discovered, especially if the patient examine when at stool
or after urinating. Other common symptoms are nervous headache, giddiness,
ringing in the ears, and a dull pain in the back part of the head. It is
frequently the case that the patient suffers a stiffness in the neck,
darting pains in the forehead, and also weak eyes are among the common
symptoms.

One very frequent, and perhaps early symptom (especially in young females)
is solitariness--a disposition to seclude themselves from society. Although
they may be tolerably cheerful when in company, they prefer rather to be
alone.

The countenance has often a gloomy and worn-down expression. The patient's
friends frequently notice a great change. Large livid spots under the eyes
is a common feature. Sudden flashes of heat may be noticed passing over the
patient's face. He is liable also to palpitations. The pulse is very
variable, generally too slow. Extreme emaciation, without any other
assignable cause for it, may be set down as another very common symptom.

If the evil has gone on for several years, there will be a general
unhealthy appearance, of a character so marked as to enable an experienced
observer at once to detect the cause. In the case of onanists especially
there is a peculiar rank odor emitted from the body, by which they may be
readily distinguished. One striking peculiarity of all these patients is,
that they cannot look a man in the face! Cowardice is constitutional with
them.

       *       *       *       *       *


HOME TREATMENT OF THE SECRET HABIT.

1. The first condition of recovery is a prompt and permanent abandonment of
the ruinous habit. Without a faithful adherence to this prohibitory law on
the part of the patient all medication on the part of the physician will
assuredly fail. The patient must plainly understand that future prospects,
character, health, and life itself, depend on an unfaltering resistance to
the morbid solicitation; with the assurance, however, that a due
perseverance will eventually render what now seems like a resistless and
overwhelming {456} propensity, not only controllable but perfectly
loathsome and undesirable.

2. Keep the mind employed by interesting the patient in the various topics
of the day, and social features of the community.

3. Plenty of bodily out of door exercise, hoeing in the garden, walking, or
working on the farm; of course not too heavy work must be indulged in.

4. If the patient is weak and very much emaciated, cod liver oil is an
excellent remedy.

5. DIET. The patient should live principally on brown bread, oat meal,
graham crackers, wheat meal, cracked or boiled wheat, or hominy, and food
of that character. No meats should be indulged in whatever; milk diet if
used by the patient is an excellent remedy. Plenty of fruit should be
indulged in; dried toast and baked apples make an excellent supper. The
patient should eat early in the evening, never late at night.

6. Avoid all tea, coffee, or alcoholic stimulants of any kind.

7. "Early to bed and early to rise," should be the motto of every victim of
this vice. A patient should take a cold bath every morning after rising. A
cold water injection in moderate quantities before retiring has cured many
patients.

8. If the above remedies are not sufficient, a family physician should be
consulted.

9. Never let children sleep together, if possible, to avoid it. Discourage
the children of neighbors and friends from sleeping with your children.

10. Have your children rise early. It is the lying in bed in the morning
that plays the mischief.

[Illustration: (l) Healthy Semen, Greatly Magnified. (r) The Semen of a
Victim of Masturbation.]

{457}
