
CHAPTER II

THE RESULTS OF DEMOCRATIC EVOLUTION

1.  The Influence upon Social Evolution of Theories of no
Rational Value.

We have seen that natural laws do not agree with the aspirations
of democracy.  We know, also, that such a statement has never
affected doctrines already in men's minds.  The man led by a
belief never troubles about its real value.

The philosopher who studies a belief must obviously discuss its
rational content, but he is more concerned with its influences
upon the general mind.

Applied to the interpretation of all the great beliefs of
history, the importance of this distinction is at once evident.
Jupiter, Moloch, Vishnu, Allah, and so many other divinities,
were, no doubt, from the rational point of view, mere illusions,
yet their effect upon the life of the peoples has been
considerable.

The same distinction is applicable to the beliefs which prevailed
during the Middle Ages.  Equally illusory, they nevertheless
exercised as profound an influence as if they had corresponded
with realities.

If any one doubts this, let him compare the domination of the
Roman Empire and that of the Church of Rome.  The first was
perfectly real and tangible, and implied no illusion.  The
second, while its foundations were entirely chimerical, was fully
as powerful.  Thanks to it, during the long night of the Middle
Ages, semi-barbarous peoples acquired those social bonds and
restraints and that national soul without which there is no
civilisation.

The power possessed by the Church proves, again, that the power
of certain illusions is sufficiently great to create, at least
momentarily, sentiments as contrary to the interests of the
individual as they are to that of society--such as the love of
the monastic life, the desire for martyrdom, the crusades, the
religious wars, &c.

The application to democratic and socialistic ideas of the
preceding considerations shows that it matters little that these
ideas have no defensible basis.  They impress and influence men's
minds, and that is sufficient.  Their results may be disastrous
in the extreme, but we cannot prevent them.

The apostles of the new doctrines are quite wrong in taking so
much trouble to find a rational basis for their aspirations.
They would be far more convincing were they to confine themselves
to making affirmations and awakening hopes.  Their real strength
resides in the religious mentality which is inherent in the heart
of man, and which during the ages has only changed its object.

Later on we shall consider from a philosophical point of view
various consequences of the democratic evolution whose course we
see accelerating.  We may say in respect of the Church in the
Middle Ages that it had the power of profoundly influencing the
mentality of men.  Examining certain results of the
democratic doctrines, we shall see that the power of these is no
less than that of the Church.


2.  The Jacobin Spirit and the Mentality created by Democratic
Beliefs.


Existing generations have inherited, not only the revolutionary
principles but also the special mentality which achieves their
success.

Describing this mentality when we were examining the Jacobin
spirit, we saw that it always endeavours to impose by force
illusions which it regards as the truth.  The Jacobin spirit has
finally become so general in France and in other Latin countries
that it has affected all political parties, even the most
conservative.  The bourgeoisie is strongly affected by it, and
the people still more so.

This increase of the Jacobin spirit has resulted in the fact that
political conceptions, institutions, and laws tend to impose
themselves by force.  Syndicalism, peaceful enough in other
countries, immediately assumed in France an uncompromising and
anarchical aspect, which betrayed itself in the shape of riots,
sabotage, and incendiarism.

Not to be repressed by timid Governments, the Jacobin spirit
produces melancholy ravages in minds of mediocre capacity.  At a
recent congress of railway men a third of the delegates voted
approval of sabotage, and one of the secretaries of the
Congress began his speech by saying:  ``I send all saboteurs my
fraternal greeting and all my admiration.''

This general mentality engenders an increasing anarchy.  That
France is not in a permanent state of anarchy is, as I have
already remarked, due to the fact that the parties by which she
is divided produce something like equilibrium.  They are animated
by a mortal hatred for one another, but none of them is strong
enough to enslave its rivals.

This Jacobin intolerance is spreading to such an extent that the
rulers themselves employ without scruple the most revolutionary
tactics with regard to their enemies, violently persecuting any
party that offers the least resistance, and even despoiling it of
its property.  Our rulers to-day behave as the ancient conquerors
used; the vanquished have nothing to hope from the victors.

Far from being peculiar to the lower orders, intolerance is
equally prominent among the ruling classes.  Michelet remarked
long ago that the violence of the cultivated classes is often
greater than that of the people.  It is true that they do not
break the street lamps, but they are ready enough to cause heads
to be broken.  The worst violence of the revolution was the work
of cultivated bourgeoisie--professors, lawyers, &c., possessors
of that classical education which is supposed to soften the
manners.  It has not done so in these days, any more than it did
of old.  One can make sure of this by reading the advanced
journals, whose contributors and editors are recruited chiefly
from among the professors of the University.

Their books are as violent as their articles, and one wonders how
such favourites of fortune can have secreted such stores of
hatred.

One would find it hard to credit them did they assure us that
they were consumed by an intense passion for altruism.  One
might more readily admit that apart from a narrow religious
mentality the hope of being remarked by the mighty ones of the
day, or of creating a profitable popularity, is the only
possible explanation of the violence recommended in their
written propaganda.

I have already, in one of my preceding works, cited some passages
from a book written by a professor at the College of France, in
which the author incites the people to seize upon the riches of
the bourgeoisie, whom he furiously abuses, and have arrived at
the conclusion that a new revolution would readily find among the
authors of such books the Marats, Robespierres, and Carriers whom
it might require.

The Jacobin religion--above all in its Socialist form--has all
the power of the ancient faiths over feeble minds Blinded by
their faith, they believe that reason is their guide, but are
really actuated solely by their passions and their dreams.

The evolution of democratic ideas has thus produced not only the
political results already mentioned, but also a considerable
effect upon the mentality of modern men.

If the ancient dogmas have long ago exhausted their power, the
theories of democracy are far from having lost theirs, and we see
their consequences increasing daily.  One of the chief results
has been the general hatred of superiority.

This hatred of whatever passes the average in social fortune or
intelligence is to-day general in all classes, from the working-
classes to the upper strata of the bourgeoisie.  The results
are envy, detraction, and a love of attack, of raillery, of
persecution, and a habit of attributing all actions to low
motives, of refusing to believe in probity, disinterestedness,
and intelligence.

Conversation, among the people as among the most cultivated
Frenchmen, is stamped with the craze for abasing and abusing
everything and everyone.  Even the greatest of the dead do not
escape this tendency.  Never were so many books written to
depreciate the merit of famous men, men who were formerly
regarded as the most precious patrimony of their country.

Envy and hatred seem from all time to have been inseparable from
democratic theories, but the spread of these sentiments has never
been so great as to-day.  It strikes all observers.

``There is a low demagogic instinct,'' writes M. Bourdeau,
``without any moral inspiration, which dreams of pulling humanity
down to the lowest level, and for which any superiority, even of
culture, is an offence to society. . . it is the sentiment of
ignoble equality which animated the Jacobin butchers when they
struck off the head of a Lavoisier or a Chenier.

This hatred of superiority, the most prominent element in the
modern progress of Socialism, is not the only characteristic of
the new spirit created by democratic ideas.

Other consequences, although indirect, are not less profound.
Such, for example, are the progress of ``statism,'' the
diminution of the power of the bourgeoisie, the increasing
activity of financiers, the conflict of the classes, the
vanishing of the old social constraints, and the degradation
of morality.

All these effects are displayed in a general insubordination and
anarchy.  The son revolts against the father, the employee
against his patron, the soldier against his officers.
Discontent, hatred, and envy reign throughout.

A social movement which continues is necessarily like a machine
in movement which accelerates its motion.  We shall therefore
find that the results of this mentality will become yet more
important.  It is betrayed from time to time by incidents whose
gravity is daily increasing--railway strikes, postmen's strikes,
explosions on board ironclads, &c.  A propos of the destruction
of the Liberte, which cost more than two million pounds and
slew two hundred men in the space of a minute, an ex-Minister of
Marine, M. de Lanessan, expresses himself as follows:--

''The evil that is gnawing at our fleet is the same as that which
is devouring our army, our public administrations, our
parliamentary system, our governmental system, and the whole
fabric of our society.  This evil is anarchy--that is to say,
such a disorder of minds and things that nothing is done as
reason would dictate, and no one behaves as his professional or
moral duty should require him to behave.''

On the subject of the catastrophe of the Liberte, which
followed that of the Iena, M. Felix Roussel said, in a
speech delivered as president of the municipal council of
Paris:--

``The causes of the evil are not peculiar to our day.  The evil
is more general, and bears a triple name: irresponsibility,
indiscipline, and anarchy.''

These quotations, which state facts with which everyone is
familiar, show that the staunchest upholders of the republican
system themselves recognise the progress of social
disorganisation.[12]  Everyone sees it, while he is conscious of
his own impotence to change anything.  It results, in fact, from
mental influences whose power is greater than that of our wills.



[12] This disorder is the same in all the Government departments
Interesting examples will be found in a report of M. Dausset to
the Municipal Council:--

``The service of the public highways, which ought above all to be
noted for its rapid execution, is, on the contrary, the very type
of red-tape, bureaucratic, and ink-slinging administration,
possessing men and money and wasting both in tasks which are
often useless, for lack of order, initiative, and method--in a
word, of organisation.

Speaking then of the directors of departments, each of whom works
as he pleases, and after his own fashion, he adds:--

``These important persons completely ignore one another; they
prepare and execute their plans without knowing anything of what
their neighbours are doing; there is no one above them to group
and co-ordinate their work.''  This is why a road is often torn
up, repaired, and then torn up again a few days later, because
the departments dealing with the supply of water, gas,
electricity, and the sewers are mutually jealous, and never
attempt to work together.  This anarchy and indiscipline
naturally cost enormous sums of money, and a private firm which
operated in this manner would soon find itself bankrupt.



3.  Universal Suffrage and its Representatives.


Among the dogmas of democracy perhaps the most fundamental of all
and the most attractive is that of universal suffrage.  It gives
the masses the idea of equality, since for a moment at least rich
and poor, learned and ignorant, are equal before the electoral
urn.  The minister elbows the least of his servants, and during
this brief moment the power of one is as great as the others.

All Governments, including that of the Revolution, have feared
universal suffrage.  At a first glance, indeed, the objections
which suggests themselves are numerous.  The idea that the
multitude could usefully choose the men capable of governing,
that individuals of indifferent morality, feeble knowledge, and
narrow minds should possess, by the sole fact of number, a
certain talent for judging the candidate proposed for its
selection is surely a shocking one.

From a rational point of view the suffrage of numbers is to a
certain extent justified if we think with Pascal.

``Plurality is the best way, because it is visible and has
strength to make itself obeyed; it is, however, the advice of the
less able.''

As universal suffrage cannot in our times be replaced by any
other institution, we must accept it and try to adapt it.  It is
accordingly useless to protest against it or to repeat with the
queen Marie Caroline, at the time of her struggle with Napoleon:
``Nothing is more dreadful than to govern men in this enlightened
century, when every cobbler reasons and criticises the
Government.''

To tell the truth, the objections are not always as great as they
appear.  The laws of the psychology of crowds being admitted, it
is very doubtful whether a limited suffrage would give a much
better choice of men than that obtained by universal suffrage.

These same psychological laws also show us that so-called
universal suffrage is in reality a pure fiction.  The crowd, save
in very rare cases, has no opinion but that of its leaders.
Universal suffrage really represents the most limited of
suffrages.

There justly resides its real danger.  Universal suffrage is made
dangerous by the fact that the leaders who are its masters are
the creatures of little local committees analogous to the clubs
of the Revolution.  The leader who canvasses for a mandate is
chosen by them.

Once nominated, he exercises an absolute local power, on
condition of satisfying the interests of his committees.  Before
this necessity the general interest of the country disappears
almost totally from the mind of the elected representative.

Naturally the committees, having need of docile servants, do not
choose for this task individuals gifted with a lofty intelligence
nor, above all, with a very high morality.  They must have men
without character, without social position, and always docile.

By reason of these necessities the servility of the deputy in
respect of these little groups which patronise him, and without
which he would be no one, is absolute.  He will speak and vote
just as his committee tells him.  His political ideal may be
expressed in a few words: it is to obey, that he may retain his
post.

Sometimes, rarely indeed, and only when by name or position or
wealth he has a great prestige, a superior character may impose
himself upon the popular vote by overcoming the tyranny of the
impudent minorities which constitute the local committees.

Democratic countries like France are only apparently governed by
universal suffrage.  For this reason is it that so many measures
are passed which do not interest the people and which the people
never demanded.  Such were the purchase of the Western railways,
the laws respecting congregations, &c.  These absurd
manifestations merely translated the demands of fanatical local
committees, and were imposed upon deputies whom they had chosen.

We may judge of the influence of these committees when we see
moderate deputies forced to patronise the anarchical
destroyers of arsenals, to ally themselves with anti-militarists,
and, in a word, to obey the most atrocious demands in order to
ensure re-election.  The will of the lowest elements of democracy
has thus created among the elected representatives manners and a
morality which we can but recognise are of the lowest.  The
politician is the man in public employment, and as Nietzsche
says:--

``Where public employment begins there begins also the clamour of
the great comedians and the buzzing of venomous flies. . . .  The
comedian always believes in that which makes him obtain his best
effects, in that which impels the people to believe in him.  To-
morrow he will have a new faith, and the day after to-morrow yet
another. . . .  All that is great has its being far from public
employment and glory.''


4.  The Craving for Reforms.


The craze for reforms imposed suddenly by means of decrees is one
of the most disastrous conceptions of the Jacobin spirit, one of
the formidable legacies left by the Revolution.  It is among the
principal factors of all the incessant political upheavals of the
last century in France.

One of the psychological causes of this intense thirst for
reforms arises from the difficulty of determining the real causes
of the evils complained of.  The need of explanation creates
fictitious causes of the simplest nature.  Therefore the remedies
also appear simple.

For forty years we have incessantly been passing reforms, each of
which is a little revolution in itself.  In spite of all these,
or rather because of them, the French have evolved almost
as little as any race in Europe.

The slowness of our actual evolution may be seen if we compare
the principal elements of our social life--commerce, industry,
&c.--with those of other nations.  The progress of other
nations--of the Germans especially--then appears enormous, while
our own has been very slow.

Our administrative, industrial, and commercial organisation is
considerably out of date, and is no longer equal to our new
needs.  Our industry is not prospering; our marine is declining.
Even in our own colonies we cannot compete with foreign
countries, despite the enormous pecuniary subventions accorded by
the State.  M. Cruppi, an ex-Minister of Commerce, has insisted
on this melancholy decline in a recent book.  Falling into the
usual errors, he believed it easy to remedy this inferiority by
new laws.

All politicians share the same opinion, which is why we progress
so slowly.  Each party is persuaded that by means of reforms all
evils could be remedied.  This conviction results in struggles
such as have made France the most divided country in the world
and the most subject to anarchy.

No one yet seems to understand that individuals and their
methods, not regulations, make the value of a people.  The
efficacious reforms are not the revolutionary reforms but the
trifling ameliorations of every day accumulated in course of
time.  The great social changes, like the great geological
changes, are effected by the daily addition of minute causes.
The economic history of Germany during the last forty
years proves in a striking manner the truth of this law.

Many important events which seem to depend more or less on
hazard--as battles, for example--are themselves subject to this
law of the accumulation of small causes.  No doubt the decisive
struggle is sometimes terminated in a day or less, but many
minute efforts, slowly accumulated, are essential to victory.  We
had a painful experience of this in 1870, and the Russians have
learned it more recently.  Barely half an hour did Admiral Togo
need to annihilate the Russian fleet, at the battle of Tsushima,
which finally decided the fate of Japan, but thousands of little
factors, small and remote, determined that success.  Causes not
less numerous engendered the defeat of the Russians--a
bureaucracy as complicated as ours, and as irresponsible;
lamentable material, although paid for by its weight in gold; a
system of graft at every degree of the social hierarchy, and
general indifference to the interests of the country.

Unhappily the progress in little things which by their total make
up the greatness of a nation is rarely apparent, produces no
impression on the public, and cannot serve the interests of
politicians at elections.  These latter care nothing for such
matters, and permit the accumulation, in the countries subject to
their influence, of the little successive disorganisations which
finally result in great downfalls.


5.  Social Distinctions in Democracies and Democratic Ideas in
Various Countries.


When men were divided into castes and differentiated chiefly by
birth, social distinctions were generally accepted as the
consequences of an unavoidable natural law.

As soon as the old social divisions were destroyed the
distinctions of the classes appeared artificial, and for that
reason ceased to be tolerated.

The necessity of equality being theoretical, we have seen among
democratic peoples the rapid development of artificial
inequalities, permitting their possessors to make for themselves
a plainly visible supremacy.  Never was the thirst for titles and
decorations so general as to-day.

In really democratic countries, such as the United States, titles
and decorations do not exert much influence, and fortune alone
creates distinctions.  It is only by exception that we see
wealthy young American girls allying themselves to the old names
of the European aristocracy.  They are then instinctively
employing the only means which will permit a young race to
acquire a past that will establish its moral framework.

But in a general fashion the aristocracy that we see springing up
in America is by no means founded on titles and decorations.
Purely financial, it does not provoke much jealousy, because
every one hopes one day to form part of it.

When, in his book on democracy in America, Toqueville spoke of
the general aspiration towards equality he did not realise that
the prophesied equality would end in the classification of men
founded exclusively on the number of dollars possessed by them.
No other exists in the United States, and it will doubtless one
day be the same in Europe.

At present we cannot possibly regard France as a democratic
country save on paper, and here we feel the necessity, already
referred to, of examining the various ideas which in different
countries are expressed by the word ``democracy.''

Of truly democratic nations we can practically mention only
England and the United States.  There, democracy occurs in
different forms, but the same principles are observed--notably, a
perfect toleration of all opinions.  Religious persecutions are
unknown.  Real superiority easily reveals itself in the various
professions which any one can enter at any age if he possesses
the necessary capacity.  There is no barrier to individual
effort.

In such countries men believe themselves equal because all have
the idea that they are free to attain the same position.  The
workman knows he can become foreman, and then engineer.  Forced
to begin on the lower rungs of the ladder instead of high up the
scale, as in France, the engineer does not regard himself as made
of different stuff to the rest of mankind.  It is the same in all
professions.  This is why the class hatred, so intense in Europe,
is so little developed in England and America.

In France the democracy is practically non-existent save in
speeches.  A system of competitions and examinations, which must
be worked through in youth, firmly closes the door upon the
liberal professions, and creates inimical and separate classes.

The Latin democracies are therefore purely theoretical.  The
absolutism of the State has replaced monarchical absolutism, but
it is no less severe.  The aristocracy of fortune has replaced
that of birth, and its privileges are no less considerable.

Monarchies and democracies differ far more in form than in
substance.  It is only the variable mentality of men that varies
their effects.  All the discussions as to various systems of
government are really of no interest, for these have no special
virtue of themselves.  Their value will always depend on that of
the people governed.  A people effects great and rapid progress
when it discovers that it is the sum of the personal efforts of
each individual and not the system of government that determines
the rank of a nation in the world.


