
CHAPTER VII

PSYCHOLOGY OF THE LEADERS OF THE REVOLUTION


1.  Mentality of the Men of the Revolution.  The respective
Influence of Violent and Feeble Characters.

Men judge with their intelligence, and are guided by their
characters.  To understand a man fully one must separate these
two elements.

During the great periods of activity--and the revolutionary
movements naturally belong to such periods--character always
takes the first rank.

Having in several chapters described the various mentalities
which predominate in times of disturbance, we need not return to
the subject now.  They constitute general types which are
naturally modified by each man's inherited and acquired
personality.

We have seen what an important part was played by the mystic
element in the Jacobin mentality, and the ferocious fanaticism to
which it led the sectaries of the new faith.

We have also seen that all the members of the Assemblies were not
fanatics.  These latter were even in the minority, since in the
most sanguinary of the revolutionary assemblies the great
majority was composed of timid and moderate men of neutral
character.  Before Thermidor the members of this group
voted from fear with the violent and after Thermidor with the
moderate deputies.

In time of revolution, as at other times, these neutral
characters, obeying the most contrary impulses, are always the
most numerous.  They are also as dangerous in reality as the
violent characters.  The force of the latter is supported by the
weakness of the former.

In all revolutions, and in particularly in the French Revolution,
we observe a small minority of narrow but decided minds which
imperiously dominate an immense majority of men who are often
very intelligent but are lacking in character

Besides the fanatical apostles and the feeble characters, a
revolution always produces individuals who merely think how to
profit thereby.  These were numerous during the French
Revolution.  Their aim was simply to utilise circumstances so as
to enrich themselves.  Such were Barras, Tallien, Fouche,
Barrere, and many more.  Their politics consisted simply in
serving the strong against the weak.

From the outset of the Revolution these ``arrivists,'' as one
would call them to-day, were numerous.  Camille Desmoulins wrote
in 1792:  ``Our Revolution has its roots only in the egotism and
self-love of each individual, of the combination of which the
general interest is composed.''

If we add to these indications the observations contained in
another chapter concerning the various forms of mentality to be
observed in times of political upheaval, we shall obtain a
general idea of the character of the men of the Revolution.  We
shall now apply the principles already expounded to the
most remarkable personages of the revolutionary period.


2.  Psychology of the Commissaries or Representatives ``on
Mission.''


In Paris the conduct of the members of the Convention was always
directed, restrained, or excited by the action of their
colleagues, and that of their environment.

To judge them properly we should observe them when left to
themselves and uncontrolled, when they possessed full liberty.
Such were the representatives who were sent ``on mission'' into
the departments by the Convention.

The power of these delegates was absolute.  No censure
embarrassed them.  Functionaries and magistrates had perforce to
obey them.

A representative ``on mission'' ``requisitions,'' sequestrates,
or confiscates as seems good to him; taxes, imprisons, deports,
or decapitates as he thinks fit, and in his own district he is a
''pasha.''

Regarding themselves as ``pashas,'' they displayed themselves
``drawn in carriages with six horses, surrounded by guards;
sitting at sumptuous tables with thirty covers, eating to the
sound of music, with a following of players, courtezans, and
mercenaries. . . .''  At Lyons ``the solemn appearance of Collot
d'Herbois is like that of the Grand Turk.  No one can come into
his presence without three repeated requests; a string of
apartments precedes his reception-room, and no one approaches
nearer than fifteen paces.''

One can picture the immense vanity of these dictators as
they solemnly entered the towns, surrounded by guards, men whose
gesture was enough to cause heads to fall.

Petty lawyers without clients, doctors without patients,
unfrocked clergymen, obscure attorneys, who had formerly known
the most colourless of lives, were suddenly made the equals of
the most powerful tyrants of history.  Guillotining, drowning,
shooting without mercy, at the hazard of their fancy, they were
raised from their former humble condition to the level of the
most celebrated potentates.

Never did Nero or Heliogabalus surpass in tyranny the
representatives of the Convention.  Laws and customs always
restrained the former to a certain extent.  Nothing restrained
the commissaries.

``Fouche,'' writes Taine, ``lorgnette in hand, watched the
butchery of 210 inhabitants of Lyons from his window.  Collot,
Laporte, and Fouche feasted on days of execution (fusillades),
and at the sound of each discharge sprang up with cries of joy,
waving their hats.''

Among the representatives ``on mission'' who exhibit this
murderous mentality we may cite as a type the ex-cure Lebon,
who, having become possessed of supreme power, ravaged Arras and
Cambrai.  His example, with that of Carrier, contributes to show
what man can become when he escapes from the yoke of law and
tradition.  The cruelty of the ferocious commissary was
complicated by Sadism; the scaffold was raised under his windows,
so that he, his wife, and his helpers could rejoice in the
carnage.  At the foot of the guillotine a drinking-booth was
established where the sans-culottes could come to drink.
To amuse them the executioner would group on the pavement, in
ridiculous attitudes, the naked bodies of the decapitated.

``The reading of the two volumes of his trial, printed at Amiens
in 1795, may be counted as a nightmare.  During twenty sessions
the survivors of the hecatombs of Arras and Cambrai passed
through the ancient hall of the bailiwick at Amiens, where the
ex-member of the Convention was tried.  What these phantoms in
mourning related is unheard of.  Entire streets dispeopled;
nonagenarians and girls of sixteen decapitated after a mockery of
a trial; death buffeted, insulted, adorned, rejoiced in;
executions to music; battalions of children recruited to guard
the scaffold; the debauchery, the cynicism, the refinements of an
insane satrap; a romance by Sade turned epic; it seems, as we
watch the unpacking of these horrors, that a whole country, long
terrorised, is at last disgorging its terror and revenging itself
for its cowardice by overwhelming the wretch there, the scapegoat
of an abhorred and vanished system.''

The only defence of the ex-clergyman was that he had obeyed
orders.  The facts with which he was reproached had long been
known, and the Convention had in no wise blamed him for them.

I have already spoken of the vanity of the deputies ``on
mission,'' who were suddenly endowed with a power greater than
that of the most powerful despots; but this vanity is not enough
to explain their ferocity.

That arose from other sources.  Apostles of a severe faith, the
delegates of the Convention, like the inquisitors of the Holy
Office, could feel, can have felt, no pity for their victims.
Freed, moreover, from all the bonds of tradition and law,
they could give rein to the most savage instincts that primitive
animality has left in us.

Civilisation restrains these instincts, but they never die.  The
need to kill which makes the hunter is a permanent proof of this.

M. Cunisset-Carnot has expressed in the following lines the grip
of this hereditary tendency, which, in the pursuit of the most
harmless game, re-awakens the barbarian in every hunter:--

``The pleasure of killing for killing's sake is, one may say,
universal; it is the basis of the hunting instinct, for it must
be admitted that at present, in civilised countries, the need to
live no longer counts for anything in its propagation.  In
reality we are continuing an action which was imperiously imposed
upon our savage ancestors by the harsh necessities of existence,
during which they had either to kill or die of hunger, while to-
day there is no longer any legitimate excuse for it.  But so it
is, and we can do nothing; probably we shall never break the
chains of a slavery which has bound us for so long.  We cannot
prevent ourselves from feeling an intense, often passionate,
pleasure in shedding the blood of animals towards whom, when the
love of the chase possesses us, we lose all feeling of pity.  The
gentlest and prettiest creatures, the song-birds, the charm of
our springtime, fall to our guns or are choked in our snares, and
not a shudder of pity troubles our pleasure at seeing them
terrified, bleeding, writhing in the horrible suffering we
inflict on them, seeking to flee on their poor broken paws or
desperately beating their wings, which can no longer support
them. . . .  The excuse is the impulse of that imperious
atavism which the best of us have not the strength to resist.''

At ordinary times this singular atavism, restrained by fear of
the laws, can only be exercised on animals.  When codes are no
longer operative it immediately applies itself to man, which is
why so many terrorists took an intense pleasure in killing.
Carrier's remark concerning the joy he felt in contemplating the
faces of his victims during their torment is very typical.  In
many civilised men ferocity is a restrained instinct, but it is
by no means eliminated.


3.  Danton and Robespierre.


Danton and Robespierre represented the two principal personages
of the Revolution.  I shall say little of the former: his
psychology, besides being simple, is familiar.  A club orator
firstly, impulsive and violent, he showed himself always ready to
excite the people.  Cruel only in his speeches, he often
regretted their effects.  From the outset he shone in the first
rank, while his future rival, Robespierre, was vegetating almost
in the lowest.

At one given moment Danton became the soul of the Revolution, but
he was deficient in tenacity and fixity of conduct.  Moreover, he
was needy, while Robespierre was not.  The continuous fanaticism
of the latter defeated the intermittent efforts of the former.
Nevertheless, it was an amazing spectacle to see so powerful a
tribune sent to the scaffold by his pale, venemous enemy and
mediocre rival.

Robespierre, the most influential man of the Revolution and the
most frequently studied, is yet the least explicable.  It is
difficult to understand the prodigious influence which
gave him the power of life and death, not only over the enemies
of the Revolution but also over colleagues who could not have
been considered as enemies of the existing Government.

We certainly cannot explain the matter by saying with Taine that
Robespierre was a pedant lost in abstractions, nor by asserting
with the Michelet that he succeeded on account of his principles,
nor by repeating with his contemporary Williams that ``one of the
secrets of his government was to take men marked by opprobrium or
soiled with crime as stepping-stones to his ambition.''

It is impossible to regard his eloquence as the cause of his
success.  His eyes protected by goggles, he painfully read his
speeches, which were composed of cold and indefinite
abstractions.  The Assembly contained orators who possessed an
immensely superior talent, such as Danton and the Girondists; yet
it was Robespierre who destroyed them.

We have really no acceptable explanation of the ascendancy which
the dictator finally obtained.  Without influence in the National
Assembly, he gradually became the master of the Convention and of
the Jacobins.  ``When he reached the Committee of Public Safety
he was already,'' said Billaud-Varennes, ``the most important
person in France.''

``His history,'' writes Michelet, ``is prodigious, far more
marvellous than that of Bonaparte.  The threads, the wheels, the
preparation of forces, are far less visible.  It is an honest
man, an austere but pious figure, of middling talents, that
shoots up one morning, borne upward by I know not what cataclysm.
There is nothing like it in the Arabian Nights.  And in a moment
he goes higher than the throne.  He is set upon the altar.
Astonishing story!''

Certainly circumstances helped him considerably.  People turned
to him as to the master of whom all felt the need.  But then he
was already there, and what we wish to discover is the cause of
his rapid ascent.  I would willingly suppose in him the existence
of a species of personal fascination which escapes us to-day.
His successes with women might be quoted in support of this
theory.  On the days when he speaks ``the passages are choked
with women . . . there are seven or eight hundred in the
tribunes, and with what transports they applaud!  At the
Jacobins, when he speaks there are sobs and cries of emotion, and
men stamp as though they would bring the hall down.''  A young
widow, Mme. de Chalabre, possessed of sixteen hundred pounds a
year, sends him burning love-letters and is eager to marry him.

We cannot seek in his character for the causes of his popularity.
A hypochondriac by temperament, of mediocre intelligence,
incapable of grasping realities, confined to abstractions, crafty
and dissimulating, his prevailing note was an excessive pride
which increased until his last day.  High priest of a new faith,
he believed himself sent on earth by God to establish the
reign of virtue.  He received writings stating ``that he
was the Messiah whom the Eternal Being had promised to reform
the world.''

Full of literary pretensions, he laboriously polished his
speeches.  His profound jealousy of other orators or men of
letters, such as Camille Desmoulins, caused their death.

``Those who were particularly the objects of the tyrant's rage,''
writes the author already cited, ``were the men of letters.  With
regard to them the jealousy of a colleague was mingled with the
fury of the oppressor; for the hatred with which he persecuted
them was caused less by their resistance to his despotism than by
their talents, which eclipsed his.''

The contempt of the dictator for his colleagues was immense and
almost unconcealed.  Giving audience to Barras at the hour of his
toilet, he finished shaving, spitting in the direction of his
colleague as though he did not exist, and disdaining to reply to
his questions.

He regarded the bourgeoisie and the deputies with the same
hateful disdain.  Only the multitude found grace in his eyes.
``When the sovereign people exercises its power,'' he said, ``we
can only bow before it.  In all it does all is virtue and truth,
and no excess, error, or crime is possible.''

Robespierre suffered from the persecution mania.  That he had
others' heads cut off was not only because he had a mission as an
apostle, but because he believed himself hemmed in by enemies and
conspirators.  ``Great as was the cowardice of his colleagues
where he was concerned,'' writes M. Sorel, ``the fear he had of
them was still greater.''

His dictatorship, absolute during five months, is a striking
example of the power of certain leaders.  We can understand that
a tyrant backed by an army can easily destroy whom he pleases,
but that a single man should succeed in sending to death a large
number of his equals is a thing that is not easily explained.

The power of Robespierre was so absolute that he was able to send
to the Tribunal, and therefore to the scaffold, the most eminent
deputies: Desmoulins, Hebert, Danton, and many another.  The
brilliant Girondists melted away before him.  He attacked even
the terrible Commune, guillotined its leaders, and replaced it by
a new Commune obedient to his orders.

In order to rid himself more quickly of the men who displeased
him he induced the Convention to enact the law of Prairial, which
permitted the execution of mere suspects, and by means of which
he had 1,373 heads cut off in Paris in forty-nine days.  His
colleagues, the victims of an insane terror, no longer slept at
home; scarcely a hundred deputies were present at sessions.
David said:  ``I do not believe twenty of us members of the
Mountain will be left.''

It was his very excess of confidence in his own powers and in the
cowardice of the Convention that lost Robespierre his life.
Having attempted to make them vote a measure which would permit
deputies to be sent before the Revolutionary Tribunal, which
meant the scaffold, without the authorisation of the Assembly, on
an order from the governing Committee, several Montagnards
conspired with some members of the Plain to overthrow him.
Tallien, knowing himself marked down for early execution, and
having therefore nothing to lose, accused him loudly of tyranny.
Robespierre wished to defend himself by reading a speech which he
had long had in hand, but he learned to his cost that although it
is possible to destroy men in the name of logic it is not
possible to lead an assembly by means of logic.  The
shouts of the conspirators drowned his voice; the cry ``Down with
the tyrant!'' quickly repeated, thanks to mental contagion, by
many of the members present, was enough to complete his downfall.
Without losing a moment the Assembly decreed his accusation.

The Commune having wished to save him, the Assembly outlawed him.
Struck by this magic formula, he was definitely lost.

``This cry of outlawry,'' writes Williams, ``at this period
produced the same effect on a Frenchman as the cry of pestilence;
the outlaw became civilly excommunicated, and it was as though
men believed that they would be contaminated passing through the
air which he had breathed.  Such was the effect it produced upon
the gunners who had trained their cannon against the Convention.
Without receiving further orders, merely on hearing that the
Commune was `outside the law,' they immediately turned their
batteries about.''

Robespierre and all his band--Saint-Just, the president of the
Revolutionary Tribunal, the mayor of the Commune, &c.,--were
guillotined on the 10th of Thermidor to the number of twenty-one.

Their execution was followed on the morrow by a fresh batch of
seventy Jacobins, and on the next day by thirteen.  The Terror,
which had lasted ten months, was at an end.

The downfall of the Jacobin edifice in Thermidor is one of the
most curious psychological events of the revolutionary period.
None of the Montagnards who had worked for the downfall of
Robespierre had for a moment dreamed that it would mark the end
of the Terror.

Tallien, Barras, Fouche, &c., overthrew Robespierre as he had
overthrown Hebert, Danton, the Girondists, and many others.
But when the acclamations of the crowd told them that the death
of Robespierre was regarded as having put an end to the Terror
they acted as though such had been their intention.  They were
the more obliged to do so in that the Plain--that is, the great
majority of the Assembly--which had allowed itself to be
decimated by Robespierre, now rebelled furiously against the
system it had so long acclaimed even while it abhorred it.
Nothing is more terrible than a body of men who have been afraid
and are afraid no longer.  The Plain revenged itself for being
terrorised by the Mountain, and terrorised that body in turn.

The servility of the colleagues of Robespierre in the Convention
was by no means based upon any feeling of sympathy for him.  The
dictator filled them with an unspeakable alarm, but beneath the
marks of admiration and enthusiasm which they lavished on him out
of fear was concealed an intense hatred.  We can gather as much
by reading the reports of various deputies inserted in the
Moniteur of August 11, 15, and 29, 1794, and notably that on
``the conspiracy of the triumvirs, Robespierre, Couthon, and
Saint-Just.''  Never did slaves heap such invectives on a fallen
master.

We learn that ``these monsters had for some time been renewing
the most horrible prescriptions of Marius and Sulla.''
Robespierre is represented as a most frightful scoundrel; we are
assured that ``like Caligula, he would soon have asked the French
people to worship his horse . . .  He sought security in
the execution of all who aroused his slightest suspicion.''

These reports forget to add that the power of Robespierre
obtained no support, as did that of the Marius and Sulla to whom
they allude, from a powerful army, but merely from the repeated
adhesion of the members of the Convention.  Without their
extreme timidity the power of the dictator could not have lasted
a single day.

Robespierre was one of the most odious tyrants of history, but he
is distinguished from all others in that he made himself a tyrant
without soldiers.

We may sum up his doctrines by saying that he was the most
perfect incarnation, save perhaps Saint-Just, of the Jacobin
faith, in all its narrow logic, its intense mysticism, and its
inflexible rigidity.  He has admirers even to-day.  M. Hamel
describes him as ``the martyr of Thermidor.''  There has been
some talk of erecting a monument to him.  I would willingly
subscribe to such a purpose, feeling that it is useful to
preserve proofs of the blindness of the crowd, and of the
extraordinary docility of which an assembly is capable when the
leader knows how to handle it.  His statue would recall the
passionate cries of admiration and enthusiasm with which the
Convention acclaimed the most threatening measures of the
dictator, on the very eve of the day when it was about to cast
him down.


4.  Fouquier-Tinville, Marat, Billaud-Varenne, &c.


I shall devote a paragraph to certain revolutionists who were
famous for the development of their most sanguinary instincts.
Their ferocity was complicated by other sentiments, by
fear and hatred, which could but fortify it.

Fouquier-Tinville, the public prosecutor of the Revolutionary
Tribunal, was one of those who have left the most sinister
memories.  This magistrate, formerly reputed for his kindness,
and who became the bloodthirsty creature whose memory evokes such
repulsion, has already served me as an example in other works,
when I have wished to show the transformation of certain natures
in time of revolution.

Needy in the extreme at the moment of the fall of the monarchy,
he had everything to hope from a social upheaval and nothing to
lose.  He was one of those men whom a period of disorder will
always find ready to sustain it.

The Convention abandoned its powers to him.  He had to pronounce
upon the fate of nearly two thousand accused, among whom were
Marie-Antoinette, the Girondists, Danton, Hebert, &c.  He had
all the suspects brought before him executed, and did not scruple
to betray his former protectors.  As soon as one of them fell
into his power--Camille Desmoulins, Danton, or another--he would
plead against him.

Fouquier-Tinville had a very inferior mind, which the Revolution
brought to the top.  Under normal conditions, hedged about by
professional rules, his destiny would have been that of a
peaceable and obscure magistrate.  This was precisely the lot of
his deputy, or substitute, at the Tribunal, Gilbert-Liendon.
``He should,'' writes M. Durel, ``have inspired the same horror
as his colleague, yet he completed his career in the upper ranks
of the Imperial magistracy.''

One of the great benefits of an organised society is that it does
restrain these dangerous characters, whom nothing but social
restraints can hold.

Fouquier-Tinville died without understanding why he was
condemned, and from the revolutionary point of view his
condemnation was not justifiable.  Had he not merely zealously
executed the orders of his superiors?  It is impossible to class
him with the representatives who were sent into the provinces,
who could not be supervised.  The delegates of the Convention
examined all his sentences and approved of them up to the last.
If his cruelty and his summary fashion of trying the prisoners
before him had not been encouraged by his chiefs, he could not
have remained in power.  In condemning Fouquier-Tinville, the
Convention condemned its own frightful system of government.  It
understood this fact, and sent to the scaffold a number of
Terrorists whom Fouquier-Tinville had merely served as a faithful
agent.

Beside Fouquier-Tinville we may set Dumas, who presided over the
Revolutionary Tribunal, and who also displayed an excessive
cruelty, which was whetted by an intense fear.  He never went out
without two loaded pistols, barricaded himself in his house, and
only spoke to visitors through a wicket.  His distrust of
everybody, including his own wife, was absolute.  He even
imprisoned the latter, and was about to have her executed when
Thermidor arrived.

Among the men whom the Convention brought to light, Billaud-
Varenne was one of the wildest and, most brutal.  He may be
regarded as a perfect type of bestial ferocity.

``In these hours of fruitful anger and heroic anguish he
remained calm, acquitting himself methodically of his task--and
it was a frightful task: he appeared officially at the massacres
of the Abbaye, congratulated the assassins, and promised them
money; upon which he went home as if he had merely been taking a
walk.  We see him as president of the Jacobin Club, president of
the Convention, and member of the Committee of Public Safety; he
drags the Girondists to the scaffold: he drags the queen thither,
and his former patron, Danton, said of him, `Billaud has a dagger
under his tongue.'  He approves of the cannonades at Lyons, the
drownings at Nantes, the massacres at Arras; he organises the
pitiless commission of Orange; he is concerned in the laws of
Prairial; he eggs on Fouquier-Tinville; on all decrees of death
is his name, often the first; he signs before his colleagues; he
is without pity, without emotion, without enthusiasm; when others
are frightened, hesitate, and draw back, he goes his way,
speaking in turgid sentences, `shaking his lion's mane'--for to
make his cold and impassive face more in harmony with the
exuberance that surrounds him he now decks himself in a yellow
wig which would make one laugh were it on any but the sinister
head of Billaud-Varenne.  When Robespierre, Saint-Just, and
Couthon are threatened in turn, he deserts them and goes over to
the enemy, and pushes them under the knife. . . .  Why?  What is
his aim?  No one knows; he is not in any way ambitious; he
desires neither power nor money.''

I do not think it would be difficult to answer why.  The thirst
for blood, of which we have already spoken, and which is very
common among certain criminals, perfectly explains the
conduct of Billaud-Varennes.  Bandits of this type kill for the
sake of killing, as sportsmen shoot game--for the very pleasure
of exercising their taste for destruction.  In ordinary times men
endowed with these homicidal tendencies refrain, generally from
fear of the policeman and the scaffold.  When they are able to
give them free vent nothing can stop them.  Such was the case
with Billaud-Varenne and many others.

The psychology of Marat is rather more complicated, not only
because his craving for murder was combined with other elements--
wounded self-love, ambition, mystic beliefs, &c.--but also
because we must regard him as a semi-lunatic, affected by
megalomania, and haunted by fixed ideas.

Before the Revolution he had advanced great scientific
pretensions, but no one attached much importance to his
maunderings.  Dreaming of place and honour, he had only obtained
a very subordinate situation in the household of a great noble.
The Revolution opened up an unhoped-for future.  Swollen with
hatred of the old social system which had not recognised his
merits, he put himself at the head of the most violent section of
the people.  Having publicly glorified the massacres of
September, he founded a journal which denounced everybody and
clamoured incessantly for executions.

Speaking continually of the interests of the people, Marat became
their idol.  The majority of his colleagues heartily despised
him.  Had he escaped the knife of Charlotte Corday, he certainly
would not have escaped that of the guillotine.


5.  The Destiny of those Members of the Convention who survived
the Revolution.


Beside the members of the Convention whose psychology presents
particular characteristics there were others--Barras, Fouche,
Tallien, Merlin de Thionville, &c.--completely devoid of
principles or belief, who only sought to enrich themselves.

They sought to build up enormous fortunes out of the public
misery.  In ordinary times they would have been qualified as
simple scoundrels, but in periods of revolution all standards
of vice and virtue seem to disappear.

Although a few Jacobins remained fanatics, the majority renounced
their convictions as soon as they had obtained riches, and became
the faithful courtiers of Napoleon.  Cambaceres, who, on
addressing Louis XVI. in prison, called him Louis Capet, under
the Empire required his friends to call him ``Highness'' in
public and ``Monseigneur'' in private, thus displaying the
envious feeling which accompanied the craving for equality in
many of the Jacobins.

``The majority of the Jacobins,'' writes M. Madelin ``were
greatly enriched, and like Chabot, Bazire, Merlin, Barras,
Boursault, Tallien, Barrere, &c., possessed chateaux and
estates.  Those who were not wealthy as yet were soon to become
so. . .  In the Committee of the year III. alone the staff of the
Thermidorian party comprised a future prince, 13 future counts, 5
future barons, 7 future senators of the Empire, and 6 future
Councillors of State, and beside them in the Convention there
were, between the future Duke of Otranto to the future Count
Regnault, no less than 50 democrats who fifteen years
later possessed titles, coats of arms, plumes, carriages,
endowments, entailed estates, hotels, and chateaux.
Fouche died worth L600,000.''

The privileges of the ancien regime which had been so
bitterly decried were thus very soon re-established for the
benefit of the bourgeoisie.  To arrive at this result it was
necessary to ruin France, to burn entire provinces, to multiply
suffering, to plunge innumerable families into despair, to
overturn Europe, and to destroy men by the hundred thousand on
the field of battle.

In closing this chapter we will recall what we have already said
concerning the possibility of judging the men of this period.

Although the moralist is forced to deal severely with certain
individuals, because he judges them by the types which society
must respect if it is to succeed in maintaining itself, the
psychologist is not in the same case.  His aim is to understand,
and criticism vanishes before a complete comprehension.

The human mind is a very fragile mechanism, and the marionettes
which dance upon the stage of history are rarely able to resist
the imperious forces which impel them.  Heredity, environment,
and circumstances are imperious masters.  No one can say with
certainty what would have been his conduct in the place of the
men whose actions he endeavours to interpret.



BOOK III

THE CONFLICT BETWEEN ANCESTRAL INFLUENCES AND REVOLUTIONARY
PRINCIPLES
