
CHAPTER III

POLITICAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE CONFLICT BETWEEN TRADITIONS AND
REVOLUTIONARY PRINCIPLES DURING THE LAST CENTURY

1.  The Psychological Causes of the continued Revolutionary
Movements to which France has been subject.

In examining, in a subsequent chapter, the evolution of
revolutionary ideas during the last century, we shall see that
during more than fifty years they very slowly spread through the
various strata of society.

During the whole of this period the great majority of the people
and the bourgeoisie rejected them, and their diffusion was
effected only by a very limited number of apostles.  But their
influence, thanks principally to the faults of Governments, was
sufficient to provoke several revolutions.  We shall examine
these briefly when we have examined the psychological influences
which gave them birth.

The history of our political upheavals during the last century is
enough to prove, even if we did not yet realise the fact, that
men are governed by their mentalities far more than by the
institutions which their rulers endeavour to force upon them.

The successive revolutions which France has suffered have been
the consequences of struggles between two portions of the
nation whose mentalities are different.  One is religious and
monarchical and is dominated by long ancestral influences; the
other is subjected to the same influences, but gives them a
revolutionary form.

From the commencement of the Revolution the struggle between
contrary mentalities was plainly manifested.  We have seen that
in spite of the most frightful repression insurrections and
conspiracies lasted until the end of the Directory.  They proved
that the traditions of the past had left profound roots in the
popular soul.  At a certain moment sixty departments were in
revolt against the new Government, and were only repressed by
repeated massacres on a vast scale.

To establish some sort of compromise between the ancien
regime and the new ideals was the most difficult of the
problems which Bonaparte had to resolve.  He had to discover
institutions which would suit the two mentalities into which
France was divided.  He succeeded, as we have seen, by
conciliatory measures, and also by dressing very ancient things
in new names.

His reign was one of those rare periods of French history during
which the mental unity of France was complete.

This unity could not outlive him.  On the morrow of his fall all
the old parties reappeared, and have survived until the present
day.  Some attach themselves to traditional influences; others
violently reject them.

If this long conflict had been between believers and the
indifferent, it could not have lasted, for indifference is
always tolerant; but the struggle was really between two
different beliefs.  The lay Church very soon assumed a religious
aspect, and its pretended rationalism has become, especially in
recent years, a barely attenuated form of the narrowest clerical
spirit.  Now, we have shown that no conciliation is possible
between dissimilar religious beliefs.  The clericals when in
power could not therefore show themselves more tolerant towards
freethinkers than these latter are to-day toward the clericals.

These divisions, determined by differences of belief, were
complicated by the addition of the political conceptions derived
from those beliefs.

Many simple souls have for long believed that the real history of
France began with the year I. of the Republic.  This rudimentary
conception is at last dying out.  Even the most rigid
revolutionaries renounce it,[10] and are quite willing to
recognise that the past was something better than an epoch of
black barbarism dominated by low superstitions.



[10] We may judge of the recent evolution of ideas upon this
point by the following passage from a speech by M. Jaures,
delivered in the Chamber of Deputies:  ``The greatness of to-day
is built of the efforts of past centuries.  France is not
contained in a day nor in an epoch, but in the succession of all
days, all periods, all her twilights and all her dawns.''




The religious origin of most of the political beliefs held in
France inspires their adepts with an inextinguishable hatred
which always strikes foreigners with amazement.

``Nothing is more obvious, nothing is more certain,'' writes Mr.
Barret-Wendell, in his book on France, ``than this fact: that not
only have the royalists, revolutionaries, and Bonapartists
always been mortally opposed to one another, but that, owing to
the passionate ardour of the French character, they have always
entertained a profound intellectual horror for one another.  Men
who believe themselves in possession of the truth cannot refrain
from affirming that those who do not think with them are
instruments of error.

``Each party will gravely inform you that the advocates of the
adverse cause are afflicted by a dense stupidity or are
consciously dishonest.  Yet when you meet these latter, who will
say exactly the same things as their detractors, you cannot but
recognise, in all good faith, that they are neither stupid nor
dishonest.''

This reciprocal execration of the believers of each party has
always facilitated the overthrow of Governments and ministers in
France.  The parties in the minority will never refuse to ally
themselves against the triumphant party.  We know that a great
number of revolutionary Socialists have been elected to the
present Chamber only by the aid of the monarchists, who are still
as unintelligent as they were at the time of the Revolution.

Our religious and political differences do not constitute the
only cause of dissension in France.  They are held by men
possessing that particular mentality which I have already
described under the name of the revolutionary mentality.  We have
seen that each period always presents a certain number of
individuals ready to revolt against the established order of
things, whatever that may be, even though it may realise all
their desires.

The intolerance of the parties in France, and their desire to
seize upon power, are further favoured by the conviction, so
prevalent under the Revolution, that societies can be remade by
means of laws.  The modern State, whatever its leader, has
inherited in the eyes of the multitudes and their leaders the
mystic power attributed to the ancient kings, when these latter
were regarded as an incarnation of the Divine will.  Not only the
people is inspired by this confidence in the power of Government;
all our legislators entertain it also.[11]



[11] After the publication of an article of mine concerning
legislative illusions, I received from one of our most eminent
politicians, M. Boudenot the senator, a letter from which I
extract the following passage:  ``Twenty years passed in the
Chamber and the Senate have shown me how right you are.  How many
times I have heard my colleagues say:  `The Government ought to
prevent this, order that,' &c.  What would you have? there are
fourteen centuries of monarchical atavism in our blood.''




Legislating always, politicians never realise that as
institutions are effects, and not causes, they have no virtue in
themselves.  Heirs to the great revolutionary illusion, they do
not see that man is created by a past whose foundations we are
powerless to reshape.

The conflict between the principles dividing France, which has
lasted more than a century, will doubtless continue for a long
time yet, and no one can foresee what fresh upheavals it may
engender.  No doubt if before our era the Athenians could have
divined that their social dissensions would have led to the
enslavement of Greece, they would have renounced them; but how
could they have foreseen as much?  M. Guiraud justly writes:  ``A
generation of men very rarely realises the task which it
is accomplishing.  It is preparing for the future; but this
future is often the contrary of what it wishes.''


2.  Summary of a Century's Revolutionary Movement in France.


The psychological causes of the revolutionary movements which
France has seen during the past century having been explained, it
will now suffice to present a summary picture of these successive
revolutions.

The sovereigns in coalition having defeated Napoleon, they
reduced France to her former limits, and placed Louis XVIII., the
only possible sovereign, on the throne.

By a special charter the new king accepted the position of a
constitutional monarch under a representative system of
government.  He recognised all the conquests of the Revolution:
the civil Code, equality before the law, liberty of worship,
irrevocability of the sale of national property, &c.  The right
of suffrage, however, was limited to those paying a certain
amount in taxes.

This liberal Constitution was opposed by the ultra-royalists.
Returned emigres, they wanted the restitution of the national
property, and the re-establishment of their ancient privileges.

Fearing that such a reaction might cause a new revolution, Louis
XVIII. was reduced to dissolving the Chamber.  The election
having returned moderate deputies, he was able to continue to
govern with the same principles, understanding very well that any
attempt to govern the French by the ancien regime would be
enough to provoke a general rebellion.

Unfortunately, his death, in 1824, placed Charles X., formerly
Comte d'Artois, on the throne.  Extremely narrow, incapable of
understanding the new world which surrounded him, and boasting
that he had not modified his ideas since 1789, he prepared a
series of reactionary laws--a law by which an indemnity of forty
millions sterling was to be paid to emigres; a law of sacrilege;
and laws establishing the rights of primogeniture, the
preponderance of the clergy, &c.

The majority of the deputies showing themselves daily more
opposed to his projects, in 1830 he enacted Ordinances dissolving
the Chamber, suppressing the liberty of the Press, and preparing
for the restoration of the ancien regime.

The effect was immediate.  This autocratic action provoked a
coalition of the leaders of all parties.  Republicans,
Bonapartists, Liberals, Royalists--all united in order to raise
the Parisian populace.  Four days after the publication of the
Ordinances the insurgents were masters of the capital, and
Charles X. fled to England.

The leaders of the movement--Thiers, Casimir-Perier, La Fayette,
&c.--summoned to Paris Louis-Philippe, of whose existence the
people were scarcely aware, and declared him king of the French.

Between the indifference of the people and the hostility of the
nobles, who had remained faithful to the legitimate dynasty, the
new king relied chiefly upon the bourgeoisie.  An electoral law
having reduced the electors to less than 200,000, this class
played an exclusive part in the government.

The situation of the sovereign was not easy.  He had to struggle
simultaneously against the legitimist supporters of Henry
V. the grandson of Charles X., and the Bonapartists, who
recognised as their head Louis-Napoleon, the Emperor's nephew,
and finally against the republicans.

By means of their secret societies, analogous to the clubs of the
Revolution, the latter provoked numerous riots at various
intervals between 1830 and 1840, but these were easily repressed.

The clericals and legitimists, on their side, did not cease their
intrigues.  The Duchess de Berry, the mother of Henry V., tried
in vain to raise the Vendee.  As to the clergy, their demands
finally made them so intolerable that an insurrection broke out,
in the course of which the palace of the archbishop of Paris was
sacked.

The republicans as a party were not very dangerous, as the
Chamber sided with the king in the struggle against them.  The
minister Guizot, who advocated a strong central power, declared
that two things were indispensable to government--``reason and
cannon.''  The famous statesman was surely somewhat deluded as to
the necessity or efficacy of reason.

Despite this strong central power, which in reality was not
strong, the republicans, and above all the Socialists, continued
to agitate.  One of the most influential, Louis Blanc, claimed
that it was the duty of the Government to procure work for every
citizen.  The Catholic party, led by Lacordaire and Montalembert,
united with the Socialists--as to-day in Belgium--to oppose the
Government.

A campaign in favour of electoral reform ended in 1848 in a fresh
riot, which unexpectedly overthrew Louis-Philippe.

His fall was far less justifiable than that of Charles X.  There
was little with which he could be reproached.  Doubtless he was
suspicious of universal suffrage, but the French Revolution had
more than once been quite suspicious of it.  Louis-Philippe not
being, like the Directory, an absolute ruler, could not, as the
latter had done, annul unfavourable elections.

A provisional Government was installed in the Hotel de Ville,
to replace the fallen monarchy.  It proclaimed the Republic,
established universal suffrage, and decreed that the people
should proceed to the election of a National Assembly of nine
hundred members.

From the first days of its existence the new Government found
itself the victim of socialistic manoeuvres and riots.

The psychological phenomena observed during the first Revolution
were now to be witnessed again.  Clubs were formed, whose leaders
sent the people from time to time against the Assembly, for
reasons which were generally quite devoid of common sense--for
example, to force the Government to support an insurrection in
Poland, &c.

In the hope of satisfying the Socialists, every day more noisy
and exigent, the Assembly organised national workshops, in which
the workers were occupied in various forms of labour.  In these
100,000 men cost the State more than L40,000 weekly.  Their
claim to receive pay without working for it forced the Assembly
to close the workshops.

This measure was the origin of a formidable insurrection, 50,000
workers revolting.  The Assembly, terrified, confided all
the executive powers to General Cavaignac.  There was a four-days
battle with the insurgents, during which three generals and the
Archbishop of Paris were killed; 3,000 prisoners were deported by
the Assembly to Algeria, and revolutionary Socialism was
annihilated for a space of fifty years.

These events brought Government stock down from 116 to 50 francs.
Business was at a standstill.  The peasants, who thought
themselves threatened by the Socialists, and the bourgeois,
whose taxes the Assembly had increased by half, turned against
the Republic, and when Louis-Napoleon promised to re-establish
order he found himself welcomed with enthusiasm.  A candidate for
the position of President of the Republic, who according to the
new Constitution must be elected by the whole body of citizens,
he was chosen by 5,500,000 votes.

Very soon at odds with the Chamber, the prince decided on a coup
d'etat.  The Assembly was dissolved; 30,000 persons were
arrested, 10,000 deported, and a hundred deputies were exiled.

This coup d'etat, although summary, was very favourably
received, for when submitted to a plebiscite it received
7,500,000 votes out of 8,000,000.

On the 2nd of November, 1852, Napoleon had himself named Emperor
by an even greater majority:  The horror which the generality of
Frenchmen felt for demagogues and Socialists had restored the
Empire.

In the first part of its existence it constituted an absolute
Government, and during the latter half a liberal Government.
After eighteen years of rule the Emperor was overthrown by the
revolution of the 4th of September, 1870, after the capitulation
of Sedan.

Since that time revolutionary movements have been rare; the only
one of importance was the revolution of March, 1871, which
resulted in the burning of many of the monuments of Paris and the
execution of about 20,000 insurgents.

After the war of 1870 the electors, who, amid so many disasters,
did not know which way to turn, sent a great number of Orleanist
and legitimist deputies to the Constituent Assembly.  Unable to
agree upon the establishment of a monarchy, they appointed M.
Thiers President of the Republic, later replacing him by Marshal
MacMahon.  In 1876 the new elections, like all those that have
followed, sent a majority of republicans to the Chamber.

The various assemblies which have succeeded to this have always
been divided into numerous parties, which have provoked
innumerable changes of ministry.

However, thanks to the equilibrium resulting from this division
of parties, we have for forty years enjoyed comparative quiet.
Four Presidents of the Republic have been overthrown without
revolution, and the riots that have occurred, such as those of
Champagne and the Midi, have not had serious consequences.

A great popular movement, in 1888, did nearly overthrow the
Republic for the benefit of General Boulanger, but it has
survived and triumphed over the attacks of all parties.

Various reasons contribute to the maintenance of the present
Republic.  In the first place, of the conflicting factions
none is strong enough to crush the rest.  In the second place,
the head of the State being purely decorative, and possessing no
power, it is impossible to attribute to him the evils from which
the country may suffer, and to feel sure that matters would be
different were he overthrown.  Finally, as the supreme power is
distributed among thousands of hands, responsibilities are so
disseminated that it would be difficult to know where to begin.
A tyrant can be overthrown, but what can be done against a host
of little anonymous tyrannies?

If we wished to sum up in a word the great transformations which
have been effected in France by a century of riots and
revolutions, we might say that individual tyranny, which was weak
and therefore easily overthrown, has been replaced by collective
tyrannies, which are very strong and difficult to destroy.  To a
people avid of equality and habituated to hold its Governments
responsible for every event individual tyranny seemed
insupportable, while a collective tyranny is readily endured,
although generally much more severe.

The extension of the tyranny of the State has therefore been the
final result of all our revolutions, and the common
characteristic of all systems of government which we have known
in France.  This form of tyranny may be regarded as a racial
ideal, since successive upheavals of France have only fortified
it.  Statism is the real political system of the Latin peoples,
and the only system that receives all suffrages.  The other forms
of government--republic, monarchy, empire--represent empty
labels, powerless shadows.


PART III

THE RECENT EVOLUTION OF THE REVOLUTIONARY PRINCIPLES

