

I. We may regard a human being as an instrument, which makes various
responses to various stimuli. If we observe these responses from
outside, we shall regard them as showing knowledge when they display
two characteristics, ACCURACY and APPROPRIATENESS. These two are quite
distinct, and even sometimes incompatible. If I am being pursued by
a tiger, accuracy is furthered by turning round to look at him, but
appropriateness by running away without making any search for
further knowledge of the beast. I shall return to the question of
appropriateness later; for the present it is accuracy that I wish to
consider.

When we are viewing a man from the outside, it is not his beliefs,
but his bodily movements, that we can observe. His knowledge must be
inferred from his bodily movements, and especially from what he says
and writes. For the present we may ignore beliefs, and regard a man's
knowledge as actually consisting in what he says and does. That is to
say, we will construct, as far as possible, a purely behaviouristic
account of truth and falsehood.

If you ask a boy "What is twice two?" and the boy says "four," you take
that as prima facie evidence that the boy knows what twice two is. But
if you go on to ask what is twice three, twice four, twice five, and so
on, and the boy always answers "four," you come to the conclusion that
he knows nothing about it. Exactly similar remarks apply to scientific
instruments. I know a certain weather-cock which has the pessimistic
habit of always pointing to the north-east. If you were to see it first
on a cold March day, you would think it an excellent weather-cock; but
with the first warm day of spring your confidence would be shaken. The
boy and the weather-cock have the same defect: they do not vary their
response when the stimulus is varied. A good instrument, or a person
with much knowledge, will give different responses to stimuli which
differ in relevant ways. This is the first point in defining accuracy of
response.

We will now assume another boy, who also, when you first question him,
asserts that twice two is four. But with this boy, instead of asking him
different questions, you make a practice of asking him the same question
every day at breakfast. You find that he says five, or six, or seven, or
any other number at random, and you conclude that he also does not know
what twice two is, though by good luck he answered right the first time.
This boy is like a weather-cock which, instead of being stuck fast, is
always going round and round, changing without any change of wind. This
boy and weather-cock have the opposite defect to that of the previous
pair: they give different responses to stimuli which do not differ in
any relevant way.

In connection with vagueness in memory, we already had occasion to
consider the definition of accuracy. Omitting some of the niceties of
our previous discussion, we may say that an instrument is ACCURATE when
it avoids the defects of the two boys and weather-cocks, that is to say,
when--

(a) It gives different responses to stimuli which differ in relevant
ways;

(b) It gives the same response to stimuli which do not differ in
relevant ways.

What are relevant ways depends upon the nature and purpose of the
instrument. In the case of a weather-cock, the direction of the wind is
relevant, but not its strength; in the case of the boy, the meaning of
the words of your question is relevant, but not the loudness of your
voice, or whether you are his father or his schoolmaster If, however,
you were a boy of his own age, that would be relevant, and the
appropriate response would be different.

It is clear that knowledge is displayed by accuracy of response to
certain kinds of stimuli, e.g. examinations. Can we say, conversely,
that it consists wholly of such accuracy of response? I do not think
we can; but we can go a certain distance in this direction. For this
purpose we must define more carefully the kind of accuracy and the kind
of response that may be expected where there is knowledge.

From our present point of view, it is difficult to exclude perception
from knowledge; at any rate, knowledge is displayed by actions based
upon perception. A bird flying among trees avoids bumping into their
branches; its avoidance is a response to visual sensations. This
response has the characteristic of accuracy, in the main, and leads
us to say that the bird "knows," by sight, what objects are in its
neighbourhood. For a behaviourist, this must certainly count as
knowledge, however it may be viewed by analytic psychology. In this
case, what is known, roughly, is the stimulus; but in more advanced
knowledge the stimulus and what is known become different. For example,
you look in your calendar and find that Easter will be early next year.
Here the stimulus is the calendar, whereas the response concerns the
future. Even this can be paralleled among instruments: the behaviour of
the barometer has a present stimulus but foretells the future, so that
the barometer might be said, in a sense, to know the future. However
that may be, the point I am emphasizing as regards knowledge is that
what is known may be quite different from the stimulus, and no part of
the cause of the knowledge-response. It is only in sense-knowledge that
the stimulus and what is known are, with qualifications, identifiable.
In knowledge of the future, it is obvious that they are totally
distinct, since otherwise the response would precede the stimulus. In
abstract knowledge also they are distinct, since abstract facts have no
date. In knowledge of the past there are complications, which we must
briefly examine.

Every form of memory will be, from our present point of view, in one
sense a delayed response. But this phrase does not quite clearly
express what is meant. If you light a fuse and connect it with a heap of
dynamite, the explosion of the dynamite may be spoken of, in a sense,
as a delayed response to your lighting of the fuse. But that only means
that it is a somewhat late portion of a continuous process of which the
earlier parts have less emotional interest. This is not the case
with habit. A display of habit has two sorts of causes: (a) the past
occurrences which generated the habit, (b) the present occurrence which
brings it into play. When you drop a weight on your toe, and say what
you do say, the habit has been caused by imitation of your undesirable
associates, whereas it is brought into play by the dropping of the
weight. The great bulk of our knowledge is a habit in this sense:
whenever I am asked when I was born, I reply correctly by mere habit. It
would hardly be correct to say that getting born was the stimulus, and
that my reply is a delayed response But in cases of memory this way
of speaking would have an element of truth. In an habitual memory, the
event remembered was clearly an essential part of the stimulus to the
formation of the habit. The present stimulus which brings the habit into
play produces a different response from that which it would produce if
the habit did not exist. Therefore the habit enters into the causation
of the response, and so do, at one remove, the causes of the habit. It
follows that an event remembered is an essential part of the causes of
our remembering.

In spite, however, of the fact that what is known is SOMETIMES an
indispensable part of the cause of the knowledge, this circumstance is,
I think, irrelevant to the general question with which we are concerned,
namely What sort of response to what sort of stimulus can be regarded
as displaying knowledge? There is one characteristic which the response
must have, namely, it must consist of voluntary movements. The need
of this characteristic is connected with the characteristic of
APPROPRIATENESS, which I do not wish to consider as yet. For the present
I wish only to obtain a clearer idea of the sort of ACCURACY that a
knowledge-response must have. It is clear from many instances that
accuracy, in other cases, may be purely mechanical. The most complete
form of accuracy consists in giving correct answers to questions, an
achievement in which calculating machines far surpass human beings. In
asking a question of a calculating machine, you must use its language:
you must not address it in English, any more than you would address
an Englishman in Chinese. But if you address it in the language it
understands, it will tell you what is 34521 times 19987, without a
moment's hesitation or a hint of inaccuracy. We do not say the machine
KNOWS the answer, because it has no purpose of its own in giving the
answer: it does not wish to impress you with its cleverness, or feel
proud of being such a good machine. But as far as mere accuracy goes,
the machine leaves nothing to be desired.

Accuracy of response is a perfectly clear notion in the case of answers
to questions, but in other cases it is much more obscure. We may say
generally that an object whether animate or inanimate, is "sensitive" to
a certain feature of the environment if it behaves differently according
to the presence or absence of that feature. Thus iron is sensitive to
anything magnetic. But sensitiveness does not constitute knowledge, and
knowledge of a fact which is not sensible is not sensitiveness to
that fact, as we have seen in distinguishing the fact known from the
stimulus. As soon as we pass beyond the simple case of question and
answer, the definition of knowledge by means of behaviour demands the
consideration of purpose. A carrier pigeon flies home, and so we say
it "knows" the way. But if it merely flew to some place at random, we
should not say that it "knew" the way to that place, any more than a
stone rolling down hill knows the way to the valley.

On the features which distinguish knowledge from accuracy of response in
general, not much can be said from a behaviourist point of view without
referring to purpose. But the necessity of SOMETHING besides accuracy of
response may be brought out by the following consideration: Suppose
two persons, of whom one believed whatever the other disbelieved,
and disbelieved whatever the other believed. So far as accuracy and
sensitiveness of response alone are concerned, there would be nothing to
choose between these two persons. A thermometer which went down for warm
weather and up for cold might be just as accurate as the usual kind; and
a person who always believes falsely is just as sensitive an instrument
as a person who always believes truly. The observable and practical
difference between them would be that the one who always believed
falsely would quickly come to a bad end. This illustrates once more that
accuracy of response to stimulus does not alone show knowledge, but must
be reinforced by appropriateness, i.e. suitability for realizing one's
purpose. This applies even in the apparently simple case of answering
questions: if the purpose of the answers is to deceive, their falsehood,
not their truth, will be evidence of knowledge. The proportion of
the combination of appropriateness with accuracy in the definition
of knowledge is difficult; it seems that both enter in, but that
appropriateness is only required as regards the general type of
response, not as regards each individual instance.