

II. I have so far assumed as unquestionable the view that the truth or
falsehood of a belief consists in a relation to a certain fact,
namely the objective of the belief. This view has, however, been often
questioned. Philosophers have sought some intrinsic criterion by which
true and false beliefs could be distinguished.* I am afraid their chief
reason for this search has been the wish to feel more certainty than
seems otherwise possible as to what is true and what is false. If
we could discover the truth of a belief by examining its intrinsic
characteristics, or those of some collection of beliefs of which it
forms part, the pursuit of truth, it is thought, would be a less arduous
business than it otherwise appears to be. But the attempts which
have been made in this direction are not encouraging. I will take two
criteria which have been suggested, namely, (1) self-evidence, (2)
mutual coherence. If we can show that these are inadequate, we may
feel fairly certain that no intrinsic criterion hitherto suggested will
suffice to distinguish true from false beliefs.

     * The view that such a criterion exists is generally held by
     those whose views are in any degree derived from Hegel. It
     may be illustrated by the following passage from Lossky,
     "The Intuitive Basis of Knowledge" (Macmillan, 1919), p.
     268: "Strictly speaking, a false judgment is not a judgment
     at all. The predicate does not follow from the subject S
     alone, but from the subject plus a certain addition C, WHICH
     IN NO SENSE BELONGS TO THE CONTENT OF THE JUDGMENT. What
     takes place may be a process of association of ideas, of
     imagining, or the like, but is not a process of judging. An
     experienced psychologist will be able by careful observation
     to detect that in this process there is wanting just the
     specific element of the objective dependence of the
     predicate upon the subject which is characteristic of a
     judgment. It must be admitted, however, that an exceptional
     power of observation is needed in order to distinguish, by
     means of introspection, mere combination of ideas from
     judgments."


(1) Self-evidence.--Some of our beliefs seem to be peculiarly
indubitable. One might instance the belief that two and two are four,
that two things cannot be in the same place at the same time, nor one
thing in two places, or that a particular buttercup that we are seeing
is yellow. The suggestion we are to examine is that such: beliefs have
some recognizable quality which secures their truth, and the truth of
whatever is deduced from them according to self-evident principles of
inference. This theory is set forth, for example, by Meinong in his
book, "Ueber die Erfahrungsgrundlagen unseres Wissens."

If this theory is to be logically tenable, self-evidence must not
consist merely in the fact that we believe a proposition. We believe
that our beliefs are sometimes erroneous, and we wish to be able to
select a certain class of beliefs which are never erroneous. If we
are to do this, it must be by some mark which belongs only to certain
beliefs, not to all; and among those to which it belongs there must be
none that are mutually inconsistent. If, for example, two propositions
p and q were self-evident, and it were also self-evident that p and q
could not both be true, that would condemn self-evidence as a guarantee
of truth. Again, self-evidence must not be the same thing as the absence
of doubt or the presence of complete certainty. If we are completely
certain of a proposition, we do not seek a ground to support our belief.
If self-evidence is alleged as a ground of belief, that implies that
doubt has crept in, and that our self-evident proposition has not
wholly resisted the assaults of scepticism. To say that any given person
believes some things so firmly that he cannot be made to doubt them is
no doubt true. Such beliefs he will be willing to use as premisses in
reasoning, and to him personally they will seem to have as much evidence
as any belief can need. But among the propositions which one man finds
indubitable there will be some that another man finds it quite possible
to doubt. It used to seem self-evident that there could not be men at
the Antipodes, because they would fall off, or at best grow giddy from
standing on their heads. But New Zealanders find the falsehood of this
proposition self-evident. Therefore, if self-evidence is a guarantee of
truth, our ancestors must have been mistaken in thinking their beliefs
about the Antipodes self-evident. Meinong meets this difficulty by
saying that some beliefs are falsely thought to be self-evident, but in
the case of others it is self-evident that they are self-evident, and
these are wholly reliable. Even this, however, does not remove the
practical risk of error, since we may mistakenly believe it self-evident
that a certain belief is self-evident. To remove all risk of error, we
shall need an endless series of more and more complicated self-evident
beliefs, which cannot possibly be realized in practice. It would seem,
therefore, that self-evidence is useless as a practical criterion for
insuring truth.

The same result follows from examining instances. If we take the four
instances mentioned at the beginning of this discussion, we shall
find that three of them are logical, while the fourth is a judgment of
perception. The proposition that two and two are four follows by purely
logical deduction from definitions: that means that its truth results,
not from the properties of objects, but from the meanings of symbols.
Now symbols, in mathematics, mean what we choose; thus the feeling of
self-evidence, in this case, seems explicable by the fact that the whole
matter is within our control. I do not wish to assert that this is
the whole truth about mathematical propositions, for the question is
complicated, and I do not know what the whole truth is. But I do wish to
suggest that the feeling of self-evidence in mathematical propositions
has to do with the fact that they are concerned with the meanings of
symbols, not with properties of the world such as external observation
might reveal.

Similar considerations apply to the impossibility of a thing being in
two places at once, or of two things being in one place at the same
time. These impossibilities result logically, if I am not mistaken, from
the definitions of one thing and one place. That is to say, they are not
laws of physics, but only part of the intellectual apparatus which we
have manufactured for manipulating physics. Their self-evidence, if this
is so, lies merely in the fact that they represent our decision as to
the use of words, not a property of physical objects.

Judgments of perception, such as "this buttercup is yellow," are in
a quite different position from judgments of logic, and their
self-evidence must have a different explanation. In order to arrive at
the nucleus of such a judgment, we will eliminate, as far as possible,
the use of words which take us beyond the present fact, such as
"buttercup" and "yellow." The simplest kind of judgment underlying the
perception that a buttercup is yellow would seem to be the perception of
similarity in two colours seen simultaneously. Suppose we are seeing
two buttercups, and we perceive that their colours are similar. This
similarity is a physical fact, not a matter of symbols or words; and it
certainly seems to be indubitable in a way that many judgments are not.

The first thing to observe, in regard to such judgments, is that as they
stand they are vague. The word "similar" is a vague word, since there
are degrees of similarity, and no one can say where similarity ends
and dissimilarity begins. It is unlikely that our two buttercups have
EXACTLY the same colour, and if we judged that they had we should have
passed altogether outside the region of self-evidence. To make our
proposition more precise, let us suppose that we are also seeing a
red rose at the same time. Then we may judge that the colours of the
buttercups are more similar to each other than to the colour of the
rose. This judgment seems more complicated, but has certainly gained
in precision. Even now, however, it falls short of complete precision,
since similarity is not prima facie measurable, and it would require
much discussion to decide what we mean by greater or less similarity. To
this process of the pursuit of precision there is strictly no limit.

The next thing to observe (although I do not personally doubt that most
of our judgments of perception are true) is that it is very difficult to
define any class of such judgments which can be known, by its intrinsic
quality, to be always exempt from error. Most of our judgments of
perception involve correlations, as when we judge that a certain noise
is that of a passing cart. Such judgments are all obviously liable to
error, since there is no correlation of which we have a right to be
certain that it is invariable. Other judgments of perception are derived
from recognition, as when we say "this is a buttercup," or even merely
"this is yellow." All such judgments entail some risk of error,
though sometimes perhaps a very small one; some flowers that look like
buttercups are marigolds, and colours that some would call yellow others
might call orange. Our subjective certainty is usually a result of
habit, and may lead us astray in circumstances which are unusual in ways
of which we are unaware.

For such reasons, no form of self-evidence seems to afford an absolute
criterion of truth. Nevertheless, it is perhaps true that judgments
having a high degree of subjective certainty are more apt to be true
than other judgments. But if this be the case, it is a result to be
demonstrated, not a premiss from which to start in defining truth and
falsehood. As an initial guarantee, therefore, neither self-evidence nor
subjective certainty can be accepted as adequate.

(2) Coherence.--Coherence as the definition of truth is advocated by
idealists, particularly by those who in the main follow Hegel. It is set
forth ably in Mr. Joachim's book, "The Nature of Truth" (Oxford, 1906).
According to this view, any set of propositions other than the whole
of truth can be condemned on purely logical grounds, as internally
inconsistent; a single proposition, if it is what we should ordinarily
call false, contradicts itself irremediably, while if it is what we
should ordinarily call true, it has implications which compel us to
admit other propositions, which in turn lead to others, and so on, until
we find ourselves committed to the whole of truth. One might illustrate
by a very simple example: if I say "so-and-so is a married man," that
is not a self-subsistent proposition. We cannot logically conceive of a
universe in which this proposition constituted the whole of truth. There
must be also someone who is a married woman, and who is married to
the particular man in question. The view we are considering regards
everything that can be said about any one object as relative in the same
sort of way as "so-and-so is a married man." But everything, according
to this view, is relative, not to one or two other things, but to all
other things, so that from one bit of truth the whole can be inferred.

The fundamental objection to this view is logical, and consists in a
criticism of its doctrine as to relations. I shall omit this line of
argument, which I have developed elsewhere.* For the moment I will
content myself with saying that the powers of logic seem to me very
much less than this theory supposes. If it were taken seriously, its
advocates ought to profess that any one truth is logically inferable
from any other, and that, for example, the fact that Caesar conquered
Gaul, if adequately considered, would enable us to discover what the
weather will be to-morrow. No such claim is put forward in practice, and
the necessity of empirical observation is not denied; but according to
the theory it ought to be.

     * In the article on "The Monistic Theory of Truth" in
     "Philosophical Essays" (Longmans, 1910), reprinted from the
     "Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society," 1906-7.

Another objection is that no endeavour is made to show that we cannot
form a consistent whole composed partly or wholly of false propositions,
as in a novel. Leibniz's conception of many possible worlds seems to
accord much better with modern logic and with the practical empiricism
which is now universal. The attempt to deduce the world by pure thought
is attractive, and in former times was largely supposed capable of
success. But nowadays most men admit that beliefs must be tested by
observation, and not merely by the fact that they harmonize with other
beliefs. A consistent fairy-tale is a different thing from truth,
however elaborate it may be. But to pursue this topic would lead us
into difficult technicalities; I shall therefore assume, without further
argument, that coherence is not sufficient as a definition of truth.